Asymmetry in repeated isotropic rotations
Malte Schr¨oder and Marc Timme Chair for Network Dynamics, Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden (cfaed) and Institute for Theoretical Physics, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany and
Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
Random operators constitute fundamental building blocks of models of complex systems yet are far from fully understood. Here, we explain an asymmetry emerging upon repeating identical isotropic (uniformly random) operations. Specifically, in two dimensions, repeating an isotropic rotation twice maps a given point on the two-dimensional unit sphere (the unit circle) uniformly at random to any point on the unit sphere, reflecting a statistical symmetry as expected. In contrast, in three and higher dimensions, a point is mapped more often closer to the original point than a uniform distribution predicts. Curiously, in the limit of the dimension d  , a symmetric distribution is approached again. We intuitively explain the emergence of this asymmetry and why it disappears in higher dimensions by disentangling isotropic rotations into a sequence of partial actions. The asymmetry emerges in two qualitatively different forms and for a wide range of general random operations relevant in complex systems modeling, including repeated continuous and discrete rotations, roto-reflections and general orthogonal transformations.

arXiv:2106.01349v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 1 Jun 2021

Random operations ubiquitously appear in complex systems models where they often reflect a statistical or approximate symmetry of the real system [1­10]. Such operations play a special role in physics and are the basic objects of random matrix theory [9, 11]. Random matrix theory asserts that spectral and statistical properties of complex physical systems are well described by those of random operators given (statistically) the same symmetry. Applications started with Eugene Wigner explaining the spacing statistics of energy levels in atomic nuclei [1], and today cover fields as diverse as quantum chaos [3], traffic dynamics [8], economics [10] and neurophysics [4, 12, 13] as well as generic complex systems [5­7].
Orthogonal transformations, and in particular rotations, are a special class of these operations with fundamental importance across physics, where they reflect rotational invariance resulting from rotational symmetry (isotropy) of the system under consideration. Examples range from a gravitational potential forcing a planet to revolve around a star and the classical dynamics of the spinning top to the dynamics of isotropic fluids, exactly rotationally invariant spin systems and nearly isotropic superconductors. Furthermore, rotational invariance enters various fundamental theories in physics, for instance the cosmological principle, essentially assuming an isotropic universe, and Noether's theorem, relating rotational invariance to conservation of angular momentum.
Mathematically, rotations are described by orthogonal matrices Q  Rd×d satisfying Q-1 = QT and det Q = 1. Each given Q maps one orientation of the unit sphere Sd-1 in d dimensions to one other orientation, and each point on the sphere to another point on the sphere. Random isotropic rotations appear particularly simple and are characterized by rotation matrices drawn uniformly from the space of all such matrices Q  Rd×d

defined above. While the theoretical foundations and mathematical descriptions of rotations and related random operations are well established, some paradoxical properties of random rotations still lack an intuitive, descriptive explanation. In this article, we give an intuitive explanation of an asymmetry emerging from the repeated action of isotropic (uniformly random) rotations first presented in 2002 in the context of signal transmission and encoding [14] and quantitatively analyzed in 2009 using measure theory [15]. By decomposing the isotropic rotation into two sequential elementary rotations, we illustrate the geometric basis for the emergence of this asymmetry for isotropic rotations in particular and orthogonal transformations in general.

Asymmetry from repeated isotropic rotations -- Consider a rotation R in d = 2 dimensions. It maps a point on a circle at angle  to an angle  =  + . For a rotation R drawn uniformly at random,  is distributed uniformly in [0, 2). Consequently, after the rotation the point  =  +  mod 2 is distributed uniformly on the circle,

R  Uniform [0, 2) ,

(1)

see Fig. 1(a,b). Applying the identical rotation R again maps the point to an angle RR = R2 = +2 mod 2. Also after this second rotation the image is uniformly distributed on the circle,

R2  Uniform [0, 2) ,

(2)

see Fig. 1(c,d). In dimensions d  3, however, the result is qualita-
tively different. Applying a uniformly random (isotropic) rotation R (now denoting a rotation matrix) maps the "north pole" ex = (1, 0, 0)T  R3 to a random point Rex. By definition, the image is uniformly distributed on the unit sphere [Fig. 1(e,f)]. Applying the

2
and Tab. I]. This phenomenon, termed the North Pole Problem [15], was initially discussed in 2002 in the context of signal transmission and encoding [14] and mathematically analyzed in 2009 using measure theory [15]. Can we intuitively understand the mechanism behind it? In the following we explicitly construct the repeated isotropic rotation in terms of elementary actions and thereby explain, first, why the asymmetry appears in d = 3 dimensions, and second, why it decays as d  .

FIG. 1. textbfAsymmetry from repeated isotropic rotations. (a,c,e,g) Realizations of the image of the north pole ex under isotropic rotations R and double rotations R2 in two and three dimensions. (b,d,f,h) Distribution of the angle  of the images with respect to ex. Images on the northern hemisphere are shaded dark red. The distribution is non-uniform for repeated isotropic rotations in three dimensions. (i) Probability pnorth of finding the image R2ex on the northern hemispehere (compare [15]). The asymmetry appears first in three dimensions and disappears again as the dimension approaches d  .
d 2 3 4 5 10 20 50 100 500  pnorth 1/2 0.71 0.68 0.66 0.62 0.59 0.56 0.54 0.52 1/2
TABLE I. Asymmetry from repeated isotropic rotations. Probability pnorth(R2) = Prob(eTxR2ex > 0) of finding the image R2ex of the north pole ex on the northern hemisphere after applying the same random isotropic rotation R twice in different dimensions d. Decimal values rounded to two significant digits (compare [15]).
same rotation again results in the image R2ex on the sphere. However, unlike in two dimensions, the image after the second rotation is not uniformly distributed on the sphere. Instead, the image is more likely located on the northern hemisphere, defined as those points x where eTx x > 0. This means that the probability pnorth of finding the image on the northern hemisphere is pnorth = Prob eTx R2ex > 0 > 1/2 [Fig. 1(g,h)]. Note that the same holds for any point x and the probability Prob xTR2x > 1/2.
This asymmetry is strongest in three dimensions and decays again as the dimensionality increases [Fig. 1(i)

Disentangling repeated isotropic rotations -- The isotropy of a rotation R is defined by the rotational invariance of its distribution, i.e., the fact that applying any given rotation before or after does not change its distribution, L (R) = L (Q  R) = L (R  Q ), where Q and Q are arbitrary rotations and L (·) denotes the distribution ("probability density") of its argument. It follows that the same holds for the distribution of the images Rx when the rotation is applied to any vector x  Sd-1. Since L (Rx) = L (R  Q x) and Q can be any arbitrary rotation, the resulting distribution cannot depend in any way on the original point. Therefore, as intuitively expected, L (Rx) must be the distribution reflecting the uniform Lebesgue measure on Sd-1, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a,b,e,f). As the action of isotropic rotations is independent of the specific initial point x, we consider, without loss of generality, the "north pole", i.e. the unit vector of the first Cartesian coordinate ex = (1, 0, . . .)T  Rd as our original point.
The first question is now why applying the same random rotation twice results in an asymmetric distribution of images L R2x in d  3 dimensions [Fig. 1(g,h)]?
To understand the action of an isotropic rotation, we explicitly construct it. Specifically, in three dimensions with Cartesian coordinates x,y, and z, we use the following idea: an isotropic rotation must re-orient the three coordinate axes uniformly to any orientation. Notably, the direction of the z-axis is defined by the direction of the other two axes and the right-handedness of the coordinate system. In order to orient the remaining x- and y-axes, we first fix the new direction of the x-axis by uniformly choosing a point v on the unit sphere and applying the rotation Rexv (v) that maps ex to v in the most direct way, i.e., the rotation with the smallest possible angle v = arccos eTx v in the plane spanned by ex and v. The y-axis can then be oriented by choosing a direction perpendicular to the (new) x-axis uniformly at random. Equivalently, we can apply an isotropic rotation in two dimensions around the (new) x-axis, i.e., around v. This rotation will map the y-axis to a uniformly distributed random direction perpendicular to v. As we saw above, this is simply a rotation around v (in the subspace R3v orthogonal to v) by an angle  chosen uniformly in [0, 2), which we denote as R v (). To-

3

gether, this defines an isotropic rotation of S2  R3 as

R = R v ()  Rexv (v)

(3)

orienting first the x-axis and then the y-axis to a uniformly chosen orientation of the sphere. We can visualize the action of the above construction on a globe in 3-dimensional space: we first position the globe such that the north pole is pointing in a uniformly random direction and then turn the globe around its north-south axis by a random angle  drawn from a uniform distribution on [0, 2). The entire construction selects one orientation of the globe and thus one rotation uniformly from all possible rotations. Importantly, this construction is independent of the explicit choice of ex as our north pole. Moreover, the same idea can be used recursively in higher dimensions and is, in a more general setting, known from the subgroup algorithm for generating uniform random variables [16].

Armed with this construction we explain the emergence of asymmetry by explicitly following how each step of

R2 = R v ()  Rexv (v)  R v ()  Rexv (v)

affects the north pole ex: (i) The first elementary rotation (the rightmost part) moves the north pole ex to its first image v by the rotation with angle v [Fig. 2(a)]. (ii) The second rotation then rotates around v, leaving
the image v of the north pole unchanged. Applying the
same rotation again, (iii) v is first mapped to a new position w = Rexv (v)2 ex, effectively rotating ex by an angle 2v [Fig. 2(b)]. (iv) The last rotation of w around v yields the final second-iterate image R2ex of the north pole. This final image is a point at angle v to v, i.e., a random point uniformly distributed on the circle cen-
tered at v through w. We note that both ex and w form the same angle v with v, thus both points lie on this circle [Fig. 2(c)]. Overall, we find

R2ex

= R v ()  Rexv (v)  R v ()  Rexv (v) ex

R

R

= R v ()  Rexv (v) v

= R v ()  w

= R v ( )  ex ,

(4)

where  =  +  mod 2. Since the rotation R v () around v is isotropic, we can equivalently rotate ex by an angle  drawn from the uniform distribution on [0, 2)
around the random axis v and obtain the same distribution, L R2ex = L (R v ( ) ex).
The final image is thus uniformly distributed on a
circle on the sphere through ex centered at v. Since all these circles cross in the point ex independent of v, the image of the north pole is more likely to be close to the

a)

b)

c)

FIG. 2. Repeated isotropic rotation in three dimensions. Using the explicit construction of an isotropic rotation R Eq. (3), we illustrate the action of the repeated rotation R2 on the north pole ex step by step [compare (Eq. 4)]. (a) The first application of R = R v ()  Rexv (v) maps ex to a random point v = Rexv (v) ex (red) uniformly distributed on S2, rotating it by an angle v. The rotation R v () around v leaves it unchanged. (b) The second application first rotates v again by the same angle v to the point w = Rexv (v)2 ex (blue). (c) The final rotation around v by an angle   [0, 2) leaves the angle v between w and v constant, mapping w to a point uniformly distributed on the circle through w and ex through v (green). For almost all points v on the sphere, this resulting image R2ex is more likely on the northern hemisphere. Only if v is exactly on the equator, defined by eTx v = 0, are the images distributed equally between northern and southern hemisphere.
original direction ex on the northern hemisphere than away from it, close to -ex on the southern hemisphere. Only if v is perpendicular to ex, i.e., if v lies on the equator, ex is rotated along a great-circle of the sphere and the image is located on the northern or southern hemispheres with equal probabilities. This step-by-step construction, Eq. (4), explains the emergence of the probabilistic asymmetry in d = 3 dimensions.
Decay of asymmetry with increasing dimension -- It remains to answer the second open question: why does the asymmetry become less pronounced as the dimension increases? An explicit construction similar to the above explicates isotropic random rotations in arbitrary dimensions d  3. As for d = 3, a point on the sphere Sd-1 is selected uniformly at random as the first image v = Rex of the north pole ex  Sd-1  Rd. As the second step, an isotropic rotation of ex "around" v (in the subspace Rdv transverse to v) is applied. The main difference now is that for d > 3 the second rotation R v is itself an isotropic rotation of Sd-2 in d - 1 > 2 dimensions and thus cannot be parameterized by a single angle . Repeating the argument given above, we find an analogous result: we obtain the same distribution when applying R2 as when simply applying an isotropic rotation in d-1 dimensions around v. The resulting image of ex is distributed on the northern or southern hemispheres with equal probabilities only if v lies on the equator of the unit sphere Sd-1  Rd, i.e., if vTex = 0. Otherwise, more weight is given to the northern hemisphere.

4

a)

b)

FIG. 3. pnorth decays with dimension. (a) The prob-

ability distribution of the first component x1 of a uniformly

random point on a sphere in d = 3, 10 and 100 dimensions.

In higher dimensions, the point is more and more likely to be

close to the equator, x1 = 0, and the distribution converges

to a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation d (solid lines). (b) Scaling of pnorth, the probability that the
image R2ex of the north pole after repeated isotropic rotation

is on the northern hemisphere. For large dimensions d  

the

probability

pnorth

decays

to

1/2

as

pnorth - 1/2



1 2d

[Eq. (10)].

Now, similar to the fact that an increasing fraction of
the volume of a sphere in d dimensions is located arbi-
trarily close to its surface as d increases, an increasing
fraction of points on the surface is located arbitrarily
close to the equator of that sphere as d increases: consider a random vector x = (x1, x2, . . . , xd)T on the unit sphere Sd-1 in d dimensions. It has a squared length x21 + x22 + · · · + x2d = 1. On average, each x2i = 1/d and, for large d, the individual coordinates xi are distributed approximately following a normal distribution
with mean 0 and variance 1/d [17, 18], see Fig. 3(a). In
particular, this holds for the first coordinate x1. Consequently, as the dimension increases, the random vector
x is more and more likely to be close to the equator, x21  1/d  0. Thus, in high dimensions, a uniformly chosen direction v is very likely (almost) perpendicular to ex and the final image R2ex of a repeated isotropic rotation is (almost) equally distributed between northern
and southern hemisphere.
The explicit construction explained above suggests a
geometric way to exactly calculate the probability pnorth for any dimension d by evaluating the fraction of im-
ages of the d - 1 dimensional isotropic rotation above
the equator. The detailed integrals of such a geometric
construction yield a scaling with dimension of the form

1

pnorth - 1/2  

(5)

2d

as d   [Fig. 3(b)], quantitatively explaining the slow decay observed in Figure 2(i). Details of the calculations are presented in the appedix.

Discussion -- In summary, we have explicated and intuitively explained the mechanism underlying an asymmetry in repeated random rotations that emerges in

FIG. 4. Repeated random orthogonal transformations. Repeating other random operations results in different types of asymmetry. (a,b) Repeating the same isotropic orthogonal transformation O, i.e., rotation or rotoreflection, twice results in the same distribution of the image as repeating an isotropic rotation R as the reflection inverts itself. (c,d) Repeating O three times results in a 50-50 split between the two hemispheres, but with a non-uniform distribution of the images.
d = 3 dimensions and disappears again with higher dimensions. Intriguingly, the naively expected 50:50 split of the image of an original point occurs both in dimension d = 2 and again in the limit d  , but not in any other dimension.
Such asymmetries emerge not only for continuous rotations. Repeating other random operations, for instance rotations of objects with discrete symmetries such as (hyper)cubic symmetry, will qualitatively face the same breaking of the symmetry. For such discrete random operations, a combinatorial analysis along the arguments detailed above will yield the respective fractions quantifying the asymmetry. Interestingly, the type of breaking of symmetry observed above arises in two qualitatively different versions. First, the 50:50 fraction between hemispheres of images of a single random operation is not preserved by repeating the identical rotation (as for the rotations studied above). Second, even if the image is distributed on the northern and southern hemisphere with a 50:50 split, the distribution of images may not be uniform. This happens, for example, when applying the same random orthogonal transformation O (rotation and/or reflection) three times in d = 3 dimensions (Fig. 4). In general, such (potential) distinctions might be more easily disentangled in systems exhibiting

5

discrete symmetry. We hope that this article helps to build a better intuition about how basic and ubiquitous symmetry operations act in the physical world around us and about why the three dimensions we live in might be especially interesting.
Appendix: Geometric calculation of pnorth

(ii) If /4  v < /2, only a fraction of the images

will be on the northern hemisphere. This fraction cor-

responds to the surface of a d - 2 dimensional sphere

with a cap missing. We describe it as one minus the

fraction of points on the southern hemisphere, where the

points on the southern hemisphere belong to a cap with

height

h2

=

2 sin (v) -

1 sin(v )

of

a

sphere

with

radius

r = sin (v) in d - 2 dimensions [illustrated in Fig. 5(b)].

a)

b)

The construction explained above suggests a geometric way to exactly calculate the probability pnorth(d) for any dimension d by evaluating the fraction of images of the d - 1 dimensional isotropic rotation above the equator. These correspond to fractions of the surface of d - 2 dimensional spheres. For example, in d = 3 dimensions we need to calculate the fraction of a d - 2 = 1 dimensional sphere (a circle) that is located above the equator [compare the green circle in Fig. 2(c)]. We then integrate this fraction over all possible directions v to obtain the final probability. We distinguish two mutually exclusive cases:
(i) If v forms an angle v < /4 with ex, all the images of double rotations R2 lie on the northern hemisphere. This set of vectors v forms the cap S(d-1)(max) of the d-1 dimensional unit sphere and is defined by its opening angle v < max = /4 or its height h1 = 1 - cos (max) [illustrated in Fig. 5(a)]. The cap has an area [19]

FIG. 5. Geometric calculation of pnorth. Following the argument in the text, we calculate pnorth by integrating over all possible directions v with the corresponding fraction of
images on the northern hemisphere. (a) If v forms an angle
v < /4 with ex (that means if v is located on the red part of the sphere), the image R2ex (green) is always on the northern hemisphere [Eq. (6) and (7)]. (b) Otherwise, if /4 < v < /2 (red), only a fraction of the final images R2ex lies on the northern hemisphere (green). A fraction corresponding to a
d - 2 dimensional spherical cap with height h2 is mapped to the southern hemisphere [Eq. (8) and (9)]. Both arguments
are symmetric with respect to v on the southern hemisphere.

A(1d-1) =

dA

(6)

S (d-1) ( /4)

d 2

d-1 1

= 

d 2

I1/2

,, 22

where (x) denotes the Gamma function and Ix(a, b) denotes the regularized incomplete Beta function. Since v is distributed uniformly on the unit sphere Sd-1  Rd, we have to weight the area of the cap relative to the total
area of the unit sphere

A(todt-1)

=

2

d 2



d 2

.

(7)

Due to symmetry, the same is true if v is on the southern

hemisphere,

v



(

3 4

,

],

giving

a

factor

2

in

the

final

evaluation.

This cap has an area [19]

d-1

A(2d-2)(r, h2)

=

2



d-1 2

r I d-2 2rh2 -h22 r2

d-2 1 ,
22

(8)

and we calculate the fraction relative to the total area of the sphere

At(dot-2)(r)

=

2 d-1 2



d-1 2

rd-2 .

(9)

We again weight each possible v with respect to the total

area of the unit sphere Sd-1  Rd [Eq. (7)]. As the first

case, this argument is also symmetric with respect to the

rotation

axis

v

on

the

southern

hemisphere,

v



[

 2

,

3 4

).

We calculate the total probability by integrating the

corresponding fraction over all directions v, where v is

distributed uniformly on the d - 1 dimensional sphere.

The probability of finding the image of R2 on the north-

ern hemisphere is then given by

pnorth(d)

=

2

A(1d-1) A(tdot-1)

+2

1 A(tdot-1)

1 - A2(d-2)(r, h2) dA

[ ) v

 4

,

 2

At(odt-2)(r)

case (i)

case (ii)

= 2 I1/2

d-1 1 ,
22

2 +
A(tdot-1)

/2

1

1 - 2 I /4

2rh2 -h22 r2

d-2 1

2

, 2

dA(v)

2 =1-
A(tdot-1)

/2 1

2 I /4

2rh2 -h22 r2

d-2 1

2

, 2

dA(v) ,

 =1- 


d 2 d-1
2

/2

I 2 sin2()-1

/4

sin4 ()

d-2 1 ,

sind-2 () d



1

+

1 

,

22

2 2d

6 (10)

where the surface element dA(v)

=

d-1

2 2

(

d-1 2

)

sin

(v )d-2

dv

describes

the

area

of

the

d-2

dimensional sphere at angle v. For example, in d = 3

dimensions this describes the circumference of a circle

of latitude with radius sin (v) multiplied by dv. The last step describes the scaling for large dimensions

d   obtained via numerical evaluation of the integral.

Evaluating this expression gives the results presented in

Tab. I and shown in Fig. 1(i) and Fig. 3(b) (compare

also [15]).

We gratefully acknowledge support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany s Excellence Strategy ­ EXC2068 ­ 390729961 ­ Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, the Cluster of Excellence Center for Advancing Electronics at TU Dresden.

[1] E. P. Wigner, SIAM Review 9, 1 (1967). [2] R. M. May, Nature 238, 413 (1972). [3] T. Kottos and U. Smilansky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4794
(1997). [4] M. Timme, F. Wolf, and T. Geisel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
074101 (2004).

[5] V. K. Jirsa and M. Ding, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 070602 (2004).
[6] J. N. Bandyopadhyay and S. Jalan, Phys. Rev. E 76, 026109 (2007).
[7] S. Jalan and J. N. Bandyopadhyay, Phys. Rev. E 76, 046107 (2007).
[8] P. Seba, J. Stat. Mech. 2009, L10002 (2009). [9] G. Livan, M. Novaes, and P. Vivo, Introduction to Ran-
dom Matrices: Theory and Practice (Springer International Publishing, 2018). [10] J. Moran and J.-P. Bouchaud, Phys. Rev. E 100, 032307 (2019). [11] M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices (Academic Press, New York, 1991). [12] H. Sompolinsky, A. Crisanti, and H. J. Sommers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 259 (1988). [13] G. Wainrib and J. Touboul, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 118101
(2013). [14] T. L. Marzetta, B. Hassibi, and B. M. Hochwald, IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory 48, 942 (2002). [15] M. L. Eaton and R. J. Muirhead, Stat. Probab. Lett. 79,
1878 (2009). [16] P. Diaconis and M. Shahshahani, Probab. Eng. Inf. Sci.
1, 15 (1987). [17] M. Spruill, Elec. Comm. in Probab. 12, 234 (2007). [18] A. Blum, J. Hopcroft, and R. Kannan, Foundations of
data science (Preprint of a textbook, 2018) available at https://www.cs.cornell.edu/jeh/book.pdf. [19] S. Li, Asian J. Math. Stat. 4, 66 (2011).

