Direct (3+1)D laser writing of graded-index optical elements
XAVIER PORTE,1,,* NIYAZI ULAS DINC,2,3,,* JOHNNY MOUGHAMES,1 GIULIA PANUSA,2 CAROLINE JULIANO,2 MUAMER KADIC,1 CHRISTOPHE MOSER,3 DANIEL BRUNNER,1 DEMETRI PSALTIS2
1Institut FEMTO-ST, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté CNRS UMR 6174, Besançon, France 2Optics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 3Laboratory of Applied Photonic Devices, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Equally contributing authors
*Corresponding authors: javier.porte@femto-st.fr ; niyazi.dinc@epfl.ch

We propose the single-step fabrication of (3+1)D graded-index (GRIN) optical elements by introducing the light exposure as the additional dimension. Following this method, we demonstrate two different optical devices: Volume holograms that are superimposed using angular and peristrophic multiplexing and optical waveguides with a well-defined refractiveindex profile. In the latter, we precisely control the propagating modes via tuning the 3D-printed waveguide parameters and report step-index and graded-index core-cladding transitions.

1. INTRODUCTION
Additive manufacturing by two-photon polymerization (TPP) is rapidly becoming an important hybridization tool among various photonic integrated platforms due to its high versatility. Neither photo-masks nor etching are required for additive manufacturing, and intricate dielectric photonic structures can accommodate a wide range of host platforms, for example quantum systems [1], silicon photonics [2] or the tip of fibers [3]. Crucially, this fabrication technology is largely agnostic to particularities of such host platforms. Sub-wavelength feature sizes, i.e. beyond diffraction limit resolution, makes TPP highly attractive for meta-optics [4], high density photonic integration [5,6] as well as for functionalization via free-form optical components [7,8]. These applications often require intricate designs, and the precise control of analogue threedimensional (3D) refractive index distributions in 3D additive manufacturing is highly desirable. Recently, graded-index (GRIN) lenses have been demonstrated, relying on varying polymerization inside a porous host material [9].
In this work, we rely only on the polymer to obtain GRIN optical volume elements printed directly on the 3D printing machine by having the exposure as the fourth variable in the writing process; hence establishing (3+1)D printing to access and modify each voxel's refractive index independently. For that purpose, we rely on the exposure-dependent refractive index of broadly utilized commercial photoresists [10-12], dynamically modifying the exposure during the printing process.
So far, 3D printing has been used to record binary-index optical elements. The applications include multilayer diffractive layers for angular multiplexing [13], volumetric meta-optics for wavelength and polarization sorting [14], and 3D waveguide interconnects with complex routing [5]. In this paper, we use (3+1)D printing to construct optical waveguides and volume holograms. The waveguide is a principal component of integrated photonics, as

evidenced through applications like photonic wire bonding [15,16], on-fiber direct laser writing [3,17] and in the context of scalable photonic interconnects [5,6]. Core-cladding 3D-laser printed structures, guide light with a refractive index of the core moderately larger than that of the cladding. Such structures are currently the subject of intense study, and basic photonic tools like single-mode low-loss waveguides [18] or multimode light splitters [19] are being demonstrated. However, those either require direct inscription into a bulk material [9], intricate 3D photonic crystal fiber structures [20], or a multi-step process relying on different materials to provide the required refractive index difference between core and cladding [2,21]. Our approach based on (3+1)D printing requires a single fabrication step for the whole waveguide.
Another interesting 3D structure is the volume hologram [22-24]. A stack of 2D images can be multiplexed in a volume hologram and each of these images can be retrieved individually by employing different angles, wavelengths or phase distributions. In a volume hologram, each 2D data corresponds to an individual hologram to be multiplexed with several others. A major bottleneck for optically recorded volume holograms is the efficiency, which falls inversely with  where M is the number of multiplexed holograms. This relation can be improved to a linear relation (1/M) by accessing and updating the refractive index of a unit volume or voxel in the fabrication of the volume hologram. We discuss the reasoning behind this improvement in Section 3a. Its high resolution makes 3D printing via TPP suitable for fabricating holograms since it provides independent access to each voxel in the fabrication volume.
Figure 1 illustrates our GRIN printing concept for the two applications discussed here: volume holograms (Fig. 1(a)) and photonic waveguides (Fig. 1(b)). Leveraging such (3+1)D or graytone lithography, our technique elegantly capitalizes on available and established 3D TPP materials and equipment and can hence be widely adopted without delay.

Fig. 1. Concept of (3+1)D printing: the refractive index (n) is controlled by dynamically changing the laser power during the printing process (E(x,y,z,t)). Illustration of this concept in a (a) volume grating used for holography and a (b) photonic waveguide with a step-transition between refractive indices of the central core (nco) and the surrounding cladding (ncl), printed with respective laser beam field amplitudes Eco > Ecl.
2. METHODOLOGY
The Clausius­Mossotti relation states that the refractive index of a material depends on the number of molecules per unit volume [25, 26]. Therefore, upon polymerization, the density of the material can change due to diffusion of monomers. In addition, many photoresins yield greater density in the polymer phase than in the resin phase. The degree of polymerization depends on the polymerization kinetics which is driven by light intensity and exposure time, thus the refractive index can be modulated by changing the light exposure [10-12]. We use this physical mechanism to demonstrate GRIN structures, printed with the (3+1)D principle. We used commercial direct-laser writing systems from Nanoscribe GmbH (Photonic Professional GT+) and the negative tone photoresist "Ip-Dip".
The (3+1)D printing process can be dissected in the following steps: the photoresist is dropped on a fused silica glass substrate (25 x 25 x 0.7 mm3) and is photo-polymerized via TPP with a 780 nm femtosecond pulsed laser, focused by a 63X (1.4 NA) microscope objective. The printing process was realized in consecutive horizontal layers as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1, and the laser power was dynamically modified for each voxel to produce the desired 3D refractive index distribution. The vertical (slicing) and the horizontal (hatching) sampling resolution is 0.3 m and 0.1 m, respectively. For volume holograms, the scan speed of the writing beam was chosen to be 7 mm/s and the laser power range is set to be 28-42% of the maximum average power that is 20 mW, while for photonic waveguides, scanning speed was chosen to be 10 mm/s and the laser power range was set to be 35-58% of the maximum average power. Therefore, the utilized laser fluences (J/cm2) per unit volume are comparable for both applications, once normalized with respect to the scan speed. The particular values are the result of a careful optimization, balancing the refractive index uniformity and mechanical stability. After printing, the non-polymerized leftover resin is washed away for the fabrication of the waveguides. However, this step is skipped for volume gratings and holograms so that the liquid resin serves as an index matching liquid.
In volume gratings and holograms, to calibrate the laser power vs refractive index relation, a rectangular prism is printed with the power increasing linearly along one transverse dimension. The phase accumulation through this structure is measured by off-axis digital holographic interferometry. Knowing the thickness, the measured phase is converted to refractive index difference with respect to the background, which is the not polymerized resin. The

obtained index difference is given in Fig. 2(a). An exponential curve is fitted on the experimental data and this curve is used for the mapping of index to writing power for gratings and holograms since it is crucial to write the refractive index controllably not to lose efficiency. Hence, the laser power is adjusted according to the target refractive index value at each voxel position for volume gratings and holograms. The effect of this adjustment is shown in Fig. 2(b), where phase extractions are given from 20 µm thick sinusoidal gratings that are printed with linear power dependence assumption and the exponential fit. The arrows in Fig. 2(b) highlight the distortion on the sine wave due to the saturation of refractive index (or polymerization) in the case of linear assumption. In Fig. 2(a), we see relatively large error bars, especially towards the low index difference. The first reason for such large error bars that applies all the data points is the noise level in the digital interferometry setup for the phase measurements. The second reason is the small laser writing changes from sample to sample as a few tens of nanometers of surface variation leads to different phase accumulation along the thickness of the sample. This effect becomes relatively higher for the regions where the refractive index change is small.

Fig. 2. (a) Refractive index difference of the polymerized part with respect to the monomer resin vs laser power. (b) Phase extractions from the 20 µm thick sinusoidal gratings printed with linear power dependence assumption and the exponential fit where the arrows highlight the effect of saturation.

3. EXPERIMENTAL DEMONSTRATIONS

a. Volume holograms
Volume holograms have been of great interest for parallel optical interconnects and data storage [27] as a 3D GRIN connection scheme [28]. When a hologram is optically recorded in a photosensitive medium by interfering a reference ( ) and object ( ) beam, the recorded hologram is given by:
 +   =  +  +  +  (1)

The last term in Eq. (1) provides the reconstruction of the object beam upon illumination with the reference. The first two terms constitute the DC component and the third term is the conjugate of the reconstruction term. By optically recording of the volume hologram it is not possible to update the index value of a single voxel in the media without affecting the others. In fact, both, recording and erasure occur in a multiplexed holographic storage. It has been shown that the efficiency () of each hologram when M holograms are superimposed by optical recording in a photorefractive medium is [29,30]:

 =    = /#  (2)

 



where  is the saturation value of the grating strength;  and  are erasure and recording time constants and M/# is the metric that depends on the properties of the recording material. If we form the hologram in a computer, we can eliminate the DC terms in Eq. (1). To multiplex M holograms, we can generate M modulated sinusoids with equal strength ( ) and slightly different carrier frequencies, which are sufficient to be individually retrieved in a volume hologram by taking advantage of angular Bragg selectivity. Let  be the maximum strength that the recording material can support if only one hologram is recorded. If M holograms are superimposed
then the standard deviation of their sum is proportional to . To a very good approximation, we find that for large M the signal
strength for each of the M holograms is  =  / assuming that phases are statistically independent. Therefore, the intensity of the light associated to an individual hologram is proportional to  or  /, and the diffraction efficiency is improved to 1/ instead of 1/ .

be 0.006, which is in accordance with the dynamic range found in the calibration. The angles of the input plane waves are swept around the Bragg angle for all the samples and the  curve is fitted as exemplified in Fig. 3(c) for the 90 µm thick grating. The first null is labeled as () referring to Bragg selectivity. Figure 3(d) shows the Bragg selectivity for all thickness values along with the theoretical curve, where we observe a good match with the experimental results.
The initials of the Optics Laboratory, O and L, are chosen to be peristrophically multiplexed in a (50 µm)3 volume as presented in Fig. 4(a). The images of the letters are propagated digitally by the Beam Propagation Method (BPM) and the diffracted fields are phase-conjugated and superimposed with two plane waves tilted at 6.5° in x and y axis for each letter, eliminating the DC terms. In Fig. 4(a), the refractive index distributions of the first (at z=0), middle (at z=25 µm) and last (at z=50 µm) layers are demonstrated, where the target refractive index dynamic range is 0.005. The obtained experimental reconstructions are given in Fig. 4(b-c) where the volume hologram is illuminated with the assigned plane wave. To demonstrate angular multiplexing as well, four arbitrarily chosen linearly polarized (LP) modes of a multimode fiber (LP21, LP12, LP11, and LP31) are multiplexed in a volume of 50x50x60 µm3 following similar steps. Four carriers were chosen corresponding to 7° and 13° in both x and y-axes. The diffraction of the chosen LP modes can be neglected for 60 µm propagation distance since their spatial distributions have low frequency components. Hence, the zvariation is kept uniform for this hologram. The XY refractive index variation is given in Fig. 4(d) and the obtained experimental intensity reconstructions are given in Fig. 4(e-h).

Fig. 3. (a) Visualization of the printed volume gratings on the substrate with the dimensions indicated. The incident (Einc) and the transmitted (Etr) beams for the characterization are shown with red arrows. (b) The efficiency vs the structure thickness plot, (c) the Bragg selectivity measurement around the Bragg angle (centered to zero) for the grating of 90-µm thickness, (d) the Bragg selectivity vs the structure thickness plot.
A volume grating is a sinusoidal refractive index distribution in any orientation. Therefore, any arbitrary distribution can be represented by a superposition of volume gratings, which makes it the fundamental 3D building block of GRIN volume elements. We printed volume gratings with a 6 µm period, which yields approximately 3.2° Bragg selectivity angle at 1.03 µm wavelength in 1.52 refractive index. The transverse dimension is (120 µm)2 and the thickness is varied from 30 µm to 210 µm in 30 µm steps. All the volume gratings are printed on the same substrate with 250 µm center-to-center separation as depicted in Fig. 3(a). A collimated beam with a dimension that is comparable to the transverse area of a single volume grating is used as the input beam. This input beam illuminated each volume grating one by one and the transmitted beam is recorded. The input angle to the samples is varied to measure Bragg selectivity. The efficiency vs thickness curve is given in Fig. 3(b). From the argument of the  curve fit,  is found to

Fig. 4. (a) 3D rendering of volume hologram with the example index distributions in transverse planes at z=0, z=25 and z=50 µm, (b-c) experimental reconstruction of letters `L' and `O', (d) the index distribution of the angular-peristrophic hologram, (e-h) reconstructed images corresponding to LP21, LP12, LP11, and LP31 respectively. All index distributions are up sampled for better visualization and share the same dynamic range that is 0.005.

b. Photonic waveguides
We 3D-printed photonic waveguides with both, step-index (STIN) and graded-index (GRIN) refractive index profiles. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the waveguide's core printed with high laser power is surrounded by a cladding printed with a lower laser power. We used writing powers of 58% (11.6 mW) and 35% (7 mW) of the maximum laser power for the highest and lowest refractive index, respectively. STIN waveguides result from a constant laser writing power all across their core, while for the core of GRIN waveguides writing power changes from high to low along a parabolic profile. We printed 25 STIN waveguides with diameters D  [1 ... 20] m, and 13 GRIN waveguides with diameters D  [5... 10] m, all embedded in cuboids of 300 m height. The scanning electron microscopy micrograph of Fig. 5(a) depicts an exemplary cuboid with 20 printed STIN waveguides inside. By printing waveguides with different diameters D, we effectively scan their normalized frequency  =   NA, where NA =  -  is the numerical aperture, 0  660 nm is the wavelength of the illumination laser and n1 (n2) are the refractive indices of core (cladding).
Fig. 5. (a) SEM image of a cuboid with 20 printed STIN waveguides. Panels (b) and (c) depict the output intensities (triangles) and fundamental mode fits (dashed lines) of a 6 µm diameter STIN and a GRIN waveguides, respectively, (d) Exemplary intensity profiles of injected LP modes (left) and their outputs after propagation through STIN waveguides of different diameters (right). We depict the first waveguide with confinement factor above 0.8 for each respective mode. (e) Theoretical confinement factor as function of the STIN waveguides diameter (D). Symbols are experimental and lines are theoretical curves for each mode LP01 (blue), LP11 (red), LP02 (green). We extract the waveguide's relevant parameters by fitting the experimental output intensities for diameters below the cut-off condition of the second propagating mode. Figure 5(b) depicts the

fit of LP01 to the normalized output of a STIN waveguide with radius R = 3 µm, where the intensity function of the LP01 mode is given by
  for||   and   for||  .The output ofa GRIN
waveguide with same radius (3 µm) is shown in Fig. 5(c). The
normalized experimental intensity is fitted with exp(-  ),
which corresponds to the intensity distribution of the fundamental mode of a GRIN fiber with an infinite parabolic refractive index profile [31]. From the fit parameters we extract the corresponding NAs of our 3D-printed photonic waveguides. Using  = 1.547 as the refractive index of IP-Dip at saturation [11], we obtain an averaged numerical aperture of NA = 0.08 ± 0.01 (i.e.  =  + 2.4  10 ) for STIN and of NA = 0.20 ± 0.05 for GRIN. Comparing the intensity profiles and the averaged NAs of single-mode GRIN and STIN waveguides we evidence that the core-confinement of the former is significantly higher, which offers a crucial advantage for small-size integration schemes [5,6].
In order to investigate the modal propagation properties, we used a spatial-light modulator (Santec LCOS SLM-200) to generate a set of LP modes, which we injected into the waveguides under close to NA-matched conditions. Figure 5(d) show exemplary waveguided outputs (right panels) for the different injected LP modes (corresponding left panels). For each printed waveguide, we calculated the confinement factor (D) defined as the fractional optical power confined to the core. The experimentally measured confinement factors (D) for STIN waveguides are plotted in Fig. 5(e), together with the theoretically calculated curves for each mode. Experimental (D) follows the theoretical predictions with a small systematic vertical offset that we attribute to background intensity originating from non-perfectly matched NA.
We furthermore investigate the propagation-length dependent losses and the maximum waveguide packing density. Propagation losses primarily depend on scattering, host-material absorption and insufficient mode confinement. We determined the global losses of the LP01 mode after propagating through the waveguides with lengths ranging from 50 m to 300 m. We chose STIN waveguides with D=7 m, which provide the highest LP01 confinement while still remaining single mode. After propagation we fitted the output intensity to a Gaussian and discarded the background. Figure 6(a) depicts the propagation losses for an injection NA of 0.12 as filled circles, empty circles correspond to an injection NA of 0.05. For both curves we systematically observe higher losses at the beginning, which, however, drop below our experimental resolution for propagation lengths larger 150 m. This notable transition is caused by the non-ideal NA matching between injection and waveguides. The resulting non-propagating contribution radiates away, which in the experiment we are able to observe visually for the first 150 m, hence directly confirming this interpretation. The sensitivity of our measurement is -1.6 dB/mm, which hence corresponds to the upper bound and losses for perfectly NA-matched injection would be below this limit. Noteworthy, Fig. 6(a) includes injection losses, and the low overall losses highlight the excellent quality of our waveguides.
Figure 6(b) shows the evanescent coupling rate between neighboring waveguides. For our characterization we printed pairs of 300 m-length waveguides with separations ranging from 0.5 m up to 6 m and explored the injection NA's impact. Optical crosstalk between adjacent waveguides is based on the overlap of

their respective evanescent fields, and non-confined optical fields decay exponentially with distance. Our evanescent coupling rates clearly exhibit the expected exponential dependency, and the coupling rate between waveguides reduces by -1.32 m-1 for NA 0.12 and -0.97 m-1 for NA 0.05, with the separation between waveguides. STIN waveguides in direct contact couple at a rate of 3 mm-1, which strongly reduces to 0.1 mm-1 for an intra-waveguide distance of 6 m. The rapidly decaying evanescent coupling therefore allows a high integration density, supporting circuits with ~6000 waveguides per mm2.

example by adding scalable photonic interconnects [5,6] to bring large scale parallel communication to classical photonic or electronic chips. (3+1)D direct laser writing hence provides a highly versatile addition to the photonics toolbox.
Funding. European Union's Horizon 2020 (713694); Volkswagen Foundation (NeuroQNet II); Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-17-EURE-0002, ANR-15-IDEX-0003); Region Bourgogne Franche-Comté; French Investissements d'Avenir; French RENATECH network and FEMTO-ST technological facility. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Acknowledgments. The two first authors, tagged with , have contributed equally to the manuscript and the order of their names has been chosen randomly.

Fig. 6. (a) Propagation losses. (b) Evanescent-coupling rate between waveguide pairs as a function of waveguides separation. Filled circles correspond to an injection NA of 0.12, empty circles to an injection NA of 0.05. The corresponding exponential fits are depicted as solid and dashed lines, respectively.
4. CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have introduced a single-step process to manufacture photonic GRIN elements based on a commercial laser writing system. We demonstrated (3+1)D printed GRIN volume gratings and holograms as well photonic waveguides with a controlled number of propagating modes for the first time.
For the STIN and GRIN photonic waveguides, we determined the waveguides' NA by carefully fitting their propagation parameters under single-mode condition, characterized propagation losses and the evanescent coupling rates between neighboring waveguides. We find higher NA and mode confinement for GRIN waveguides. Moreover, significantly larger NAs should be achievable in the future, as the investigated and other commercial resins allow for larger refractive index modifications [11]. For the volume holograms, the results demonstrate printing an index distribution arbitrarily varying in 3D. Since the printed volumes are small, a small number of holograms is supported. Greater volumes should be fabricated to store more information and confirm the 1/M relation. The currently employed printing technique would require stitching of different blocks to reach larger volumes since the field of view of the writing objective is limited. Any shift due to a stitching error would make different parts of the hologram out of phase. Thus, a thorough optimization of the fabrication process for stitching is necessary to approach mm sizes.
In general, the additive nature of our approach is a crucial asset however. It makes the process less dependent on the working distance of microscope objectives, and just recently millimetersized photonic components have been demonstrated [7]. Furthermore, (3+1)D additive photonic fabrication has the potential functionalize integrated photonic or electronic circuits, for

REFERENCES
1. M. Sartison, K. Weber, S. Thiele, L. Bremer, S. Fischbach, T. Herzog, S. Kolatschek, M. Jetter, S. Reitzenstein, A. Herkommer, P. Michler, S. Luca Portalupi, and H. Giessen. "3D printed micro-optics for quantum technology: Optimised coupling of single quantum dot emission into a single-mode fibre," Light: Advanced Manufacturing, 2(1), 1­17 (2021).
2. J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, M. Karpov, et al. "Parallel convolutional processing using an integrated photonic tensor core," Nature 589, 52­ 58 (2021).
3. K. Markiewicz and P. Wasylczyk, "Photonic-chip-on-tip: compound photonic devices fabricated on optical fibers," Opt. Express 27, 8440 (2019).
4. W. Hadibrata, H. Wei, S. Krishnaswamy, and K. Aydin, "Inverse Design and 3D Printing of a Metalens on an Optical Fiber Tip for Direct Laser Lithography," Nano Letters 21(6), 2422-2428 (2021).
5. J. Moughames, X. Porte, M. Thiel, G. Ulliac, L. Larger, M. Jacquot, M. Kadic, and D. Brunner, "Three-dimensional waveguide interconnects for scalable integration of pho-tonic neural networks," Optica 7, 640 (2020).
6. J. Moughames, X. Porte, L. Larger, M. Jacquot, M. Kadic, and D. Brunner, "3D printed multimode-splitters for pho-tonic interconnects," Opt. Mater. Express 10, 2952 (2020).
7. S. Ristok, S. Thiele, A. Toulouse, A. M. Herkommer, and H. Giessen, "Stitching-free 3D printing of millimeter-sized highly transparent spherical and aspherical optical components," Opt. Mater. Express 10, 2370 (2020).
8. P.-I. Dietrich, M. Blaicher, I. Reuter, M. Billah, T. Hoose, A. Hofmann, C. Caer, R. Dangel, B. Offrein, U. Troppenz, M. Moehrle, W. Freude, and C. Koos, "In situ 3D nanoprinting of free-form coupling elements for hybrid photonic integration," Nature Photonics 12(4), 241­247 (2018).
9. C. R. Ocier, C. A. Richards, D. A. Bacon-Brown, Q. Ding, R. Kumar, T. J. Garcia, J. van de Groep, J.-H. Song, A. J. Cyphersmith, A. Rhode, A. N. Perry, A. J. Littlefield, J. Zhu, D. Xie, H. Gao, J. F. Messinger, M. L. Brongersma, K. C. Toussaint, L. L. Goddard, and P. V. Braun, "Direct laser writing of volumetric gradient index lenses and waveguides," Light. Sci. & Appl. 9, 196 (2020).
10. S. Dottermusch, D. Busko, M. Langenhorst, U. W. Paetzold, and B. S. Richards, "Exposure-dependent refractive index of Nanoscribe IP-Dip photoresist layers," Opt. Lett. 44, 29 (2019).
11. M. Schmid, D. Ludescher, and H. Giessen, "Optical properties of photoresists for femtosecond 3D printing: refractive index, extinction, luminescence-dose dependence, aging, heat treatment and comparison between 1-photon and 2-photon exposure," Opt. Mater. Express 9, 4564 (2019).
12. A. Zukauskas, I. Matulaitien, D. Paipulas, G. Niaura, M. Malinauskas, and R. Gadonas, "Tuning the refractive index in 3D direct laser writing

lithography: towards GRIN microoptics," Laser Photonics Rev. 9, 706 (2015). 13. N. U. Dinc, J. Lim, E. Kakkava, C. Moser, and D. Psaltis, "Computer generated optical volume elements by additive manufacturing," Nanophotonics 9, 4173 (2020). 14. P. Camayd-Muñoz, C. Ballew, G. Roberts, and A. Faraon, "Multifunctional volumetric meta-optics for color and polarization image sensors," Optica 7, 280 (2020). 15. N. Lindenmann, G. Balthasar, D. Hillerkuss, R. Schmogrow, M. Jordan, J. Leuthold, W. Freude, and C. Koos, "Photonic wire bonding: a novel concept for chip-scale interconnects,"Opt. Express 20, 17667 (2012) 16. M. Blaicher, M. R. Billah, J. Kemal, T. Hoose, P. Marin-Palomo, A. Hofmann, Y. Kutuvantavida, C. Kieninger, P.-I.Dietrich, M. Lauermann, S. Wolf, U. Troppenz, M. Moehrle, F. Merget, S. Skacel, J. Witzens, S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, "Hybrid multi-chip assembly of optical communication engines by in situ 3D nano-lithography," Light. Sci.& Appl. 9, 71 (2020). 17. A. Bogucki, L. Zinkiewicz, W. Pacuski, P. Wasylczyk, and P. Kossacki, "Optical fiber micro-connector with nanometer positioning precision for rapid prototyping of photonic devices," Opt. Express 26, 11513 (2018). 18. G. Panusa, Y. Pu, J. Wang, C. Moser, and D. Psaltis, "Fabrication of SubMicron Polymer Waveguides through Two-Photon Polymerization in Polydimethylsiloxane," Polymers 12, 2485 (2020). 19. P. Gaso, D. Pudis, D. Seyringer, A. Kuzma, L. Gajdosova,T. Mizera, and M. Goraus, "3D Polymer Based 1x4 BeamSplitter," J. Light. Technol. 8724, 1­1 (2020). 20. A. Bertoncini and C. Liberale, "3D Printed waveguides based on photonic crystal fiber designs for complex fiber-end photonic devices," Optica 7, 1487 (2020). 21. A. Nesic, M. Blaicher, T. Hoose, A. Hofmann, M. Lauermann, Y. Kutuvantavida, M. Nöllenburg, S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, "Photonic-integrated circuits with non-planar topologies realized by 3Dprinted waveguide overpasses," Optics Express 27(12), 17402 (2019). 22. D. Gabor, "Associative holographic memories," IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 13, pp. 156­9 (1969). 23. E. N. Leith, A. Kozma, J. Upatnieks, J. Marks, and N. Massey, "Holographic data storage in three-dimensional media," Appl. Opt., vol. 5, pp. 1303­11 (1966). 24. D. Psaltis, and F. Mok, "Holographic memories," Sci. Am., vol. 273, pp. 70­6, (1995). 25. O. F. Mossotti, Memorie di Matematica e di Fisica della Societa Italiana delle Scienze Residente in Modena 24 II, p. 49 (1850). 26. R. Clausius, Die Mechanische Behandlung der Elektricitat, Vieweg, Braunschweig, p. 62 (1858). 27. D. Brady, and D. Psaltis, "Control of volume holograms," JOSA A 9, 1167 (1992). 28. N. U. Dinc, D. Psaltis, and D. Brunner, "Optical neural networks: the 3D connection," Photoniques 114, 34­38 (2020). 29. F. H. Mok, G. W. Burr, and D. Psaltis, "System metric for holographic memory systems," Opt. Lett. 21, 896 (1996) 30. E. S. Maniloff, and K. M. Johnson, "Maximized photorefractive holographic storage," J. Appl. Phys. 70, 470 (1991). 31. A. W. Snyder and J. D. Love, Optical Waveguide Theory (Chapman & Hall, 1983).

