Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

Janning Meinert Universit¨at Heidelberg, Institut fu¨r Theoretische Physik,
Philosophenweg 16, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
j.meinert@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de

Ralf Hofmann Universit¨at Heidelberg, Institut fu¨r Theoretische Physik,
Philosophenweg 16, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
r.hofmann@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de

arXiv:2106.01457v1 [hep-ph] 2 Jun 2021

June 4, 2021

Abstract

Motivated by the SU(2)CMB modification of the cosmological model CDM, we consider isolated fuzzy-dark-matter lumps, made of ultralight axion particles whose masses arise due
to distinct SU(2) Yang-Mills scales and the Planck mass MP . In contrast to SU(2)CMB, these Yang-Mills theories are in confining phases (zero temperature) throughout most of
the Universe's history and associate with the three lepton flavours of the Standard Model
of particle physics. As the Universe expands, axionic fuzzy dark matter comprises a three-
component fluid which undergoes certain depercolation transitions when dark energy (a
global axion condensate) is converted into dark matter. We extract the lightest axion mass ma,e = 0.675 × 10-23 eV from well motivated model fits to observed rotation curves in low-surface-brightness galaxies (SPARC catalogue). Since the virial mass of an isolated lump
solely depends on MP and the associated Yang-Mills scale the properties of an e-lump predict those of µ- and  -lumps. As a result, a typical e-lump virial mass  6.3 × 1010 M suggests that massive compact objects in galactic centers such as Sagittarius A in the Milky Way are
(merged) µ- and  -lumps. In addition,  -lumps may constitute globular clusters. SU(2)CMB is always thermalised, and its axion condensate never has depercolated. If the axial anomaly
indeed would link leptons with dark matter and the CMB with dark energy then this would
demystify the dark Universe through a firmly established feature of particle physics.

Keywords galaxy rotation curves; low surface brightness; dark matter; dark energy; ultralight axion particles; cores; halos; mass-density; profiles; pure Yang-Mills theory

1 Introduction

70 % dark energy, inducing late-time acceleration

[6, 7]. This model requires a substantial contribution

of about 26 % cold dark matter to the critical density

Dark matter was introduced as an explanation for and allows for a contribution of baryons of roughly

the anomalous, kinematic behavior of luminous test 4 %.

matter in comparison with the gravity exerted by its

luminous surroundings, e.g., virialised stars within a

galaxy [1] or a virialised galaxy within a cluster of To determine all parameters of CDM at a high ac-

galaxies [2]. That luminous matter can be segregated curacy, cosmological distance scales can be calibrated

from dark matter is evidenced by the bullet cluster by high-redshift data (inverse distance ladder, global

in observing hot intergalactic plasma (X-ray) in be- cosmology), coming from precision observations of

tween localised dark-mass distributions (gravitational the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) or from

lensing) [3, 4].

large-scale structure surveys probing Baryon Acous-

tic Oscillations (BAO). Alternatively, low-redshift

data (direct distance ladder, local cosmology) can be

The present Standard Model of Cosmology (SMC) used by appeal to standard or standardisable can-

CDM posits a spatially flat Universe [5] with about

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

dles such as cepheids, TRGB stars, supernovae Ia, vations suggest a core or soliton profile sol(r) subject and supernovae II. Recently, a comparison between to a constant central matter density c = sol(r = 0),

global and local cosmology has revealed tensions [8] see e.g. [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39]. A model of fuzzy

in some of the cosmological parameter values (e.g., dark matter (FDM) [33, 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,

H0 [9, 10, 11, 12] and 8 - m [13, 14, 15], see also 46, 47], according to the ground-state solution of the [16] for the context of a high-redshift modification of Schr¨odinger-Poisson system embedded into cosmolog-

CDM).

ical simulations [46], posits a condensate of free axion

particles within the galactic core. For the radial range

These interesting discrepancies motivate modifications of CDM. A cosmological model aiming to resolve

r200 > r > re > 3 rc

(2)

these tensions should target high-redshift radiation

and the dark sector. In particular, models which are the associated central matter densities sol(r) gives

in principle falsifiable by terrestrial experiments and way to a selfgravitating cloud of effective, nonrelativiswhich pass such tests could lead to a demystification tic particles of mass  3deB × NFW(r). Here r200 of the dark Universe. However, searches for weakly denotes the virial radius defined such that

interacting, massive and stable particles (WIMPS) [17], whose potential existence is suggested by certain extensions of the Standard Model of Particle Physics

NFW (r200 )

=

200

3

MP2 8

H02

,

(3)

(SMPP), so far have not produced any detection [18, 19].

where H0 is the Hubble constant, and deB = deB(r) indicates the de-Broglie wavelength of an axionic par-

ticle for re < r < r200 where the NFW model applies.

An attractive possibility to explain the feebleness of a Note that within the core region r < re the correlation

potential interaction between the dark sector of the length in the condensate is given by the reduced Comp-

SMC and SMPP matter in terms of the large hierarchy ton wave length ¯C = 1/ma. In what follows, we will

between particle-physics scales and the Planck mass is refer to such a system ­ condensate core plus NFW-tail

the theoretically [20, 21, 22] and experimentally [23] ­ as a lump. In [48] FDM fits to the rotations curves

solidly anchored occurrence of an axial anomaly, which of low-surface-brightness galaxies, which are plausibly

is induced by topological charge densities [24] in the assumed to be dominated by dark matter, have pro-

ground states of pure Yang-Mills theories [25]. The duced an axion mass of ma = 0.554 × 10-23 eV. Note

axial anomaly acts on top of a dynamical chiral symme- also that the cosmological simulation of [46] associates

try breaking mediated by a force of hierarchically large the axionic scalar field with dark-matter perturbations

mass scale compared to the scales of the Yang-Mills only but not with the background dark-matter density

theories. To enable the axial anomaly throughout which is assumed to be conventional CDM.

the Universe's entire history chiral fermions, which acquire mass through gravitational torsion and which can be integrated out in a Planck-scale de-Sitter background [26], need to be fundamentally charged under certain gauge groups. In such a scenario gravity itself - a strong force at the Planck scale - would induce the dynamical chiral symmetry breaking [27, 28, 29]. The anomaly then generates an axion mass ma [24] for particles that a priori are chiral Nambu-Goldstone bosons. Working in natural units c = = kB = 1, one has

Another potential difficulty with CDM, which FDM is capable of addressing, is the prediction of too many satellite galaxies around large hosts like the Milky Way or Andromeda [49], see, however, [50] for a cosmological simulation within CDM. A recent match of observed satellite abundances with cosmological simulations within the FDM context yields a stringent bound on the axionic particle mass ma [50]: ma > 2.9 × 10-21 eV. This bound is consistent with ma = 2.5+-32..60 × 10-21 eV derived from an analysis of the Milky-Way rotation curve in [38].

2 ma = MP ,

There is yet another indication that CDM may face (1) a problem in delaying the formation of large galax-
ies of mass M  1012 M due to their hierarchical

where  denotes a Yang-Mills scale and MP = 1.221 × 1028 eV the Planck mass [27, 29]. The colddark-matter (CDM) paradigm is successful in explaining large-scale structure in the CDM context but

formation out of less massive ones. This seems to contradict the high-redshift observation of such galaxies [51] and suggests that a component of active structure formation is at work.

exhibits problems at small scales, e.g. galactic and Assuming axions to be a classical ideal gas of non-

lower [30]: While N-body simulations within CDM relativistic particles the mass ma can be extracted

reveal matter-density profiles of the galactic DM halos from CMB simulations of the full Planck data subject

that are characterised by a central cusp of the Navarro- to scalar adiabatic, isocurvature, and tensor-mode ini-

Frenk-White (NFW) type [31], NFW  r-1 [32] (r tial conditions [52] (10-25 eV ma  10-24 eV with

the radial distance to the center of the galaxy), obser- a 10 % contribution to DM and a 1 % contribution of

2

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

isocurvature and tensor modes) and from a modelling scales and that zp,e  53. As a consequence, conof Lyman- data [53] with conservative assumptions straints on axion masses from cosmological simulations
on the thermal history of the intergalactic medium. by confrontation with the observed small-scale struc-
For the XQ-100 and HIRES/MIKE quasar spectra ture should be repeated based on the model of [16]. samples one obtains respectively ma  7.12×10-22 eV This, however, is beyond the scope of the present work. and ma  1.43 × 10-21 eV.

In our discussion of Sec. 5 we conclude that three To discuss point (ii) further, we refer to [16], where a

axion species of hierarchically different masses could dark sector was introduced as a deformation of CDM.

determine the dark-matter physics of our Universe. This modification models a sudden transition from

When comparing the results of axion-mass extractions dark energy to dark matter at a redshift zp = 53. Such

with FDM based axion-mass constraints obtained a transition is required phenomenologically to recon-

in the literature it is important to observe that a cile high-z cosmology (well below the Planckian regime

single axion species always is assumed. For exam- but prior to and including recombination), where the

ple, this is true of the combined axion-mass bound dark-matter density is reduced compared to CDM,

ma > 3.8 × 10-21 eV, derived from modelling the with well-tested low-z cosmology. That a reduced

Lyman- flux power spectrum by hydrodynamical dark-matter density is required at high z is as a re-

simulations [53], and it applies to the cosmological sult of an SU(2)CMB-induced temperature-z relation evolution of scalar-field based dark-matter perturba- [55]. Depercolation of a formely spatially homoge-

tions yielding an axion mass of ma  8 × 10-23 eV in neous axion condensate, which introduces a change of

[46].

the equation of state from  = -P to P = 0, is a result

of the Hubble radius rH ­ the spatial scale of causal

In the present article we are interested in pursuing the consequences of FDM for the physics of dark matter on super-galactic and sub-galactic scales within a cosmological model which deviates from CDM in three essential points: (i) FDM is subject to three instead of one nonthermal axionic particle species, whose present cosmological mass densities are nearly equal, (ii) axion lumps (condensate core plus halo of fluctuating density granules) cosmologically originate from depercolation transitions at distinct redshifts

connectedness in a Friedmann-Lemaitre-RobertsonWalker (FLRW) Universe ­ exceeding by far the gravitational Bohr radius rB of an isolated, spherically symmetric system of selfgravitating axion particles. The value of the ratio rH /rB at depercolation so far is subject to phenomenological extraction, but should intrinsically be computable in the future by analysis of the Schr¨odinger-Poisson system in a thus linearly perturbed background cosmology whose dark sector is governed by axion fields subject to their potentials.

zp,i out of homogeneous condensates [16], and (iii) Roughly speaking, at depercolation from an equa-

the usual, nearly scale invariant spectrum of adia- tion of state  = -P the quantum correlations in

batic curvature fluctuations imprinted as an initial the axionic system become insufficient to maintain

condition for cosmological cold-dark-matter evolution, the homogeneity of the formerly homogeneously Bose-

presumably created by inflation, does not apply.

condensed state. The latter therefore decays or deper-

colates into selfgravitating islands of axionic matter

Point (i) derives from the match of axion species with the three lepton families of the Standard Model of particle physics. These leptons emerge in the confining phases of SU(2) Yang-Mills theories [54]. According to Eq. (1) axion masses are then determined by the universal Peccei-Quinn scale MP and the distinct Yang-Mills scales e, µ, and  .

whose central regions continue to be spatially confined Bose condensates but whose peripheries are virialised, quantum correlated particle clouds of an energy density that decays rapidly in the distance r to the gravitational center to approach the cosmological dark-sector density. On cosmological scales, each of these islands (lumps) can be considered a massive (nonrelativistic) particle by itself such that the equation of state of the

associated ensemble becomes P = 0: The density of

Point (ii) is suggested by a cosmological model [16] lumps then dilutes as a-3 where a denotes the cos-

which is induced by the postulate that the CMB itself mological scale factor. For the entire dark sector we

is described by an SU(2) gauge theory [25] and which have

fits the CMB power spectra TT, TE, and EE remarkably well except for low l. The according overshoot in ds(z) =  + pdm,0(z + 1)3 + edm,0
TT at large angular scales may be due to the neglect
of the nontrivial, SU(2)-induced photon dispersion at

(z + 1)3, (zp,e + 1)3,

z < zp,e z  zp,e

.

(4)

low frequencies.

Fits of this model to the TT, TE, and EE CMB power

spectra reveal that edm,0



1 2

pdm,0.

Here pdm,0

Point (iii) relates to the fact that a condensate does denotes a primordial contribution to the present dark-

not maintain density perturbations on cosmological matter density parameter dm,0 = edm,0 + pdm,0

while edm,0 refers to the emergence of dark matter

3

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

due to the depercolation of a formerly homogeneous ion mass ma: The Soliton-NFW model, see [43] and Bose-Einstein condensate into isolated lumps once references therein, and the Burkert model [57].

their typical Bohr radius is well covered by the horizon radius rH . One may question that depercolation occurs suddenly at zp,e, the only justification so far being the economy of the model. If a first-principle simulation of the Schr¨odinger-Poisson system plus background cosmology reveals that the transition from dark energy to dark matter during depercolation involves a finite z-range then this has to be included in the model of Eq. (4).

Rather model independently, we extract a typical value of ma,e  0.7 × 10-23 eV which confirms the value obtained in [48]. With Eq. (1) this value of ma,e implies a Yang-Mills scale of e  287 eV. This is smaller than e = 511 keV/118.6 = 4.31 keV found in [54] where a link to an SU(2) Yang-Mills theory
governing the first lepton family is made: SU(2)e. Note that the larger value of e was extracted in the deconfining phase [54] while the smaller value,

After depercolation has occurred, a small dark-energy obtained from the axion mass ma,e, relates to the

residual  persists to become the dominant cosmo- confining phase. The suppression of Yang-Mills scale logical constant today. As we will argue in Sec. 5, the is plausible because topological charges, which invoke

primordial dark-matter density pdm,0 could originate the axial anomaly, are less resolved in the confining as

from the stepwise depercolation of former dark energy compared to the deconfining phase. The gravitational

in the form of super-horizon sized µ- and  -lumps. Bohr radius associated with a typical e-lump mass

Therefore, dark energy dominates the dark sector of Me  6.3×1010 M turns out to be rB,e  0.26 kpc.

at sufficiently high z. However, due to radiation

dominance dark energy then was a marginal contribution to the expansion rate. The model of [16] was shown to fit the CMB anisotropies with a low baryon density, the local value for the redshift of re-ionisation [56], and the local value of H0 from supernovae Ia distance-redshift extractions [10, 11].

Having fixed the scales of SU(2)CMB, SU(2)e and linked their lumps to dark energy and the dark-
matter halos of low-surface-brightness galaxies, re-
spectively, we associate the lumps of SU(2)µ and SU(2) with pdm,0 of the dark-sector cosmological model in Eq. (4). Within a galaxy, each indi-

vidual µ- and  -lump provides a mass fraction of

The purpose of the present work is to propose a (me/mµ)2  2.3 × 10-5 and (me/m )2  8.3 × 10-8,

scenario which accommodates edm,0, pdm,0, and respectively, of the mass Me of an e-lump, see Eq. (11). . At the same time, we aim at explaining the

parameters edm,0 and pdm,0 in terms of axial anomalies subject to a Planck-mass Peccei-Quinn scale and three SU(2) Yang-Mills theories associated with the three lepton families. In addition, an explanation of parameter  is proposed which invokes the SU(2) Yang-Mills theory underlying the CMB. Hence, the explicit gauge-theory content of our model is: SU(2)e× SU(2)µ× SU(2) × SU(2)CMB .

This paper is organised as follows. In Sec. 2 we discuss features of lumps in terms of a universal ratio between reduced Compton wavelength and gravitational Bohr radius. As a result, a typical lump mass can be expressed solely in terms of Yang-Mills scale and Planck mass. The rotation curves of galaxies with low surface brightness (SPARC library) are analysed in Sec. 3 using two models with spherically symmetric mass

densities: the Soliton-Navarro-Frenk-White (SNFW)

We start with the observation in [35] that ultralight and the Burkert model. Assuming that only one

bosons necessarily need to occur in the form of selfgrav- Planck-scale axion species dominates the dark halo

itating condensates in the cores of galaxies. Because of a low-surface-brightness galaxy in terms of an iso-

these cores were separated in the course of nonthermal lated, unmerged e-lump, we extract the typical axion

depercolation halos of axion particles, correlated due mass ma,e in Sec. 3.2. In Sec. 3.3 we demonstrate the to gravitational virialisation on the scale of their de consistency of axion-mass extraction between the two

Broglie wavelength, were formed around the conden- models: The gravitational Bohr radius, determined in

sates. Such a halo reaches out to a radius, say, of r200 SNFW, together with the lump mass, obtained from where its mass density starts to fall below 200 times the Burkert-model-fit, predicts an axion mass which

the critical cosmological energy density of the spatially is compatible with the axion mass extracted from the

flat FLRW Universe. A key concept in describing such soliton-core density of the SNFW model. The typi-

a system - a lump - is the gravitational Bohr radius cal value of the axion mass suggests an association

rB defined as

rB



MP2 M m2a

,

with SU(2) Yang-Mills dynamics responsible for the

(5)

emergence of the first lepton family. In Sec. 4 this information is used to discuss the cosmological ori-

gin and role of lumps played in the dark Universe

where M is the mass of the lump which should coin- in association with the two other lepton families and

cide with the viral mass, say M200. We use two FDM the SU(2) gauge theory propounded to describe the

models of the galactic mass density (r) to describe CMB [16, 55]. As a result, on subgalactic scales the

low-surface-brightness galaxies and to extract the ax-

4

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

µ-lumps could explain the presence of massive compact objects in galactic centers such as Sagittarius A

rB,i ¯C

=

(i) ,

(9)

in the Milky Way [58, 59] while  -lumps may relate where  is a smooth dimensionless function of its

to globular clusters [60]. On super-galactic scales and for z < zp,e, however, lumps from all axion species act like CDM. On the other hand, the CMB-lump's extent always exceeds the Hubble radius by many orders of

dimensionless argument i  ma,i/MP with the property that limi0 i(i) < . This is because the typical mass Mi  M200,i of an isolated, unmerged lump, which enters rB,i via Eq. (5), is, due to adiabat-

magnitude and therefore should associate with dark ically slow depercolation, by itself only a function of

energy. Finally, in Sec. 5 we discuss in more detail the two mass scales ma,i and MP mediating the interhow certain dark structures of the Milky Way may play between quantum and gravitational correlations

have originated in terms of µ- and  -lumps. We also that give rise to the formation of the lump. Since i is provide a summary and an outlook on future work. much smaller than unity, we can treat the right-hand

We work in natural units = c = kB = 1.

side of Eq. (9) as a universal constant. In practice,

2 Gravitational Bohr radius and reduced

we will in Sec. 3 derive the values of rB,e and ma,e by matching dark-matter halos of low surface-brightness
galaxies with well motivated models of a lump's mass

Compton wave length of a Planck-scale density. As a result, we state a value of   314 in

axion

Eq. (25) of Sec. 4.

Eq. (9) together with Eqs. (6), (5), and (1) imply for

We start by conveying some features of basic ax- the mass Mi of the isolated, unmerged lump

ion lumps, cosmologically originated by depercolation transitions, that we wish to study. Let

1

¯C,i  ma,i

(6)

Mi

=

1 

MP3 2i

.

(10)

Eq. (10) is important because it predicts that the ratios

denote the reduced Compton wavelength and

of lump masses solely are determined by the squares of the ratios of the respective Yang-Mills scales or,

da,i 

ma,i 1/3 ¯i

(7)

the mean distance between axion particles within the spherically symmetric core of the lump of mean darkmatter mass density ¯i. One has

¯i



M200,i

4 3

rB3 ,i

.

(8)

The energy densities i of each of the three darkenergy like homogeneous condensates of axionic parti-
cles prior to lump depercolation are assumed to arise
due to Planckian physics [29]. Therefore, each ¯i may only depend on MP and ma,i (i = e, µ,  ). Finiteextent, isolated, unmerged lumps self-consistently are
characterised by a fixed ratio between the reduced

what is the same [54], by the ratios of charged lepton masses me, mµ, and m . One has

M = Mµ Mµ = Me M = Me

m

2
 283 ,

mµ

me

2
 2.3 × 10-5 ,

mµ

me

2
 8.3 × 10-8 .

m

(11)

Moreover, Eqs. (1), (7), (6), (8), and (10) fix the ratio

i 

da,i ¯C,i

as

i =

4 1/3 3

 i MP

4/3
.

(12)

Compton wavelength ¯C,i - the correlation length in the condensate of free axion particles at zero temper-
ature - and the Bohr radius rB,i.

Since i MP we have i 1, and therefore a large number of axion particles are covered by one
reduced Compton wave length. This assures that the

Let us explain this. Causal lump segregation due to assumption of a condensate core is selfconsistent. A

cosmological expansion (depercolation), which sets thermodynamical argument for the necessity of ax-

in when the Hubble radius rH becomes sufficiently ion condensates throughout the Universe's expansion larger than rB, is adiabatically slow and generates a history is given in Sec. 4. In [35] the non-local and sharply peaked distribution of lump masses (and Bohr non-linear (integro-differential) Schr¨odinger-equation,

radii) in producing typically sized condensate cores. obtained from a linear Schr¨odinger equation and a

These cores are surrounded by halos of axion particles Poisson equation for the gravitational potential, see

that represent regions of the dissolved condensate and e.g. [61], governing the lump, was analysed. An exci-

nonthermally are released by the mutual pull of cores tation of such a lump in terms of its wave-function i during depercolation. In principle, we can state that containing radial zeros was envisaged in [35, 48]. Here

for an isolated, unmerged lump

instead, we assume the isolated, unmerged lump to be

5

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

in its ground state, parameterised by a phenomenologi- species one obtains a good analytic description of the cal mass density i(r)  |i|2(r) > 0 which represents soliton density profile as [48]
the lump well [46].

Finally, Eq. (5) together with Eqs. (1) and (10) yield for the gravitational Bohr radius

sol(r)

=

(1 +

c 0.091(r/rc)2)8

,

(17)

rB,i

=



MP 2i

.

3 Analysis of rotation curves

(13) where c is the core density [46]. On the whole, the fuzzy dark matter profile can than be approximated
as

In this section, we extract the axion mass ma,e from observed RCs of low-surface-brightness galaxies which
fix the lump mass Me and a characterising length scale ­ the gravitational Bohr radius rB,e. This, in turn, determines the (primary, see Sec. 4) Yang-Mills
scale e associated with the lump. We analyse RCs from the SPARC library [62].

FDM(r) = (r - r)sol + (r - r )NFW . (18)

For the Burkert model one assumes a mass-density profile of the form [57]

Bu(r)

=

(r

+

0 r03 r0)(r2

+

r02)

(19)

3.1 Fuzzy Dark Matter: SNFW vs. Burkert model

where 0 refers to the central mass density and r0 is To investigate, for a given galaxy and RC, the un- a scale radius. derlying spherically symmetric mass density (r) it is useful to introduce the orbit-enclosed mass

r
M (r) = 4 dr r 2(r ) .

3.2 Analysis of RCs in the SNFW model (14)

0
Using Eqs. (14), (15), and (18), we obtain the orbital

Assuming virialisation, spherical symmetry, and New- velocity VSNFW of the SNFW model [63, Eq. (17)] tonian gravity the orbital velocity V (r) of a test mass which is fitted to observed RCs. This determines the

(a star) is given as

parameters r , rs, and c. The density s relates to

these fit parameters by demanding continuity of the

GM (r)

V (r) =

,

r

(15) SNFW mass density at r [48]. As a result, one has

where M (r) is defined in Eq. (14), and G  MP-2 denotes Newton's constant. The lump mass M is defined

s(c, rc, r

, rs)

=

c

(r /rs)(1 + (1 + 0.091(r

r /rs)2 /rc)2)8

.

(20)

to be M200  M (r200) where r200 is given by Eq. (3).

For an extraction of ma,e and therefore the associ- Examples of good fits with 2/d.o.f. < 1, see Tab. 2,

ated Yang-Mills scale governing the mass of a lump according to Eq. (10), we use the Soliton-NavarroFrenk-White (SNFW) and the Burkert model. The

are shown in Tab. 1. The derived quantity ma,e is extracted from the following equation [46]

mass-density profile of the NFW-part of the SNFWmodel is given as [32]

NFW(r) =

r rs

Ns FW

(1

+

r rs

)2

,

(16)

c  1.9×109(ma,e/10-23eV)-2(rc/kpc)-4M kpc-3 (21)
The other derived quantities r200 and M200 are obtained by employing Eqs. (3) and (14) with M (r =

where Ns FW associates with the central mass density, r200)  M200, respectively. In Fig. 1 a frequency disand rs is a scale radius which represents the onset of tribution of ma,e is shown, based on a sample of 17 the asymptotic cubic decay in distance r to the galac- best fitting galaxies, see Tab. 1 for the fits to the RCs.

tic center. Note that profile NFW exhibits an infinite The maximum of the smooth-kernel-distribution (solid cusp as r  0 and that the orbit-enclosed mass M (r) line) is at

diverges logarithmically with the cutoff radius r for

the integral in Eq. (14). In order to avoid the cuspy behavior for r  0, an axionic Bose-Einstein conden-

ma,e = (0.72 ± 0.5) × 10-23 eV .

(22)

sate (soliton density profile) is assumed to describe the

soliton region r  re. From the ground-state solution

of the Schr¨odinger-Poisson system for a single axion

6

3.2 Analysis of RCs in the SNFW model

7

Table 1. Best fits of SNFW to RCs of 17 SPARC galaxies. The arrows indicate the Bohr radius of the e-lump,
rB,e (red), the core radius of the soliton rc (orange), the transition radius from the soliton model to the NFW model re (yellow), and the scale radius of the NFW model rs (green).

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

Table 2. Fits of RCs to SNFW model: Galaxy name, Hubble Type, 2/d.o.f., luminosity, axion mass ma, r200, virial mass M200, central density c, scale radius rs, transition radius re, core radius rc, and re/rc. The fitting constraints are heuristic and motivated by the results of [48], r200 < 200 kpc, re, rc < 6 kpc, and re/rc>0.1.

Figure 1: Frequency distribution of axion mass ma,e as extracted from the SNFW model for 17 best fit-

Figure 2: Frequency distribution of the virial mass M200 in units of solar masses M from the 17 best-

ting galaxies. The maximum of the smooth-kernel- fitting galaxies in the SNFW model. The maximum distribution (solid, blue line) is at ma,e = (0.72 ± of the distribution is at M200 = (6.3 ± 4) × 1010 M .

0.5) × 10-23 eV (red, vertical line).

In Fig. 2 a frequency distribution of M200 is shown for the 17 best-fitting galaxies. Fig. 3 depicts the
distribution of these galaxies in the M200 ­ surfacebrightness plane. The maximum of the smooth-kerneldistribution is at M200 = (6.3 ± 3) × 1010 M . With Eq. 5 this implies a mean Bohr radius of

rB,e = (6.3 ± 4) × 1010 M

Mp2 ((0.72 ± 0.5) × 10-23 eV)2

= (0.26 ± 0.1) kpc .

(23)

This value of rB,e is used in the Burkert-model analysis of Sec. 3.3 to extract the frequency distribution of

Figure 3: Extracted virial masses M200 in units of solar masses M from sample of the 17 best-fitting

ma,e via the frequency distribution of M200.

galaxies in the SNFW model.

8

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

Fig. 3 depicts the distribution of the sample of galaxies used in Fig. 1 in the M200 ­ surface-brightness plane.
3.3 Analysis of RCs in the Burkert model
Table 3 depict the fits of the Burkert model to the 17 RCs used in the SNFW fits. Table 4 a) and b) in the apendix indicate that three out of these 17 RCs are fitted with a 2/d.o.f. > 1. Therefore, we resort to a sample of 80 galaxies which fit with 2/d.o.f. < 1.

frequency distribution of ma,e shown in Fig. 6. Obvi-
ously, the maximum of the smooth-kernel distribution, ma,e = (0.65±0.4)×10-23 eV, is compatible with that in the SNFW model ma,e = (0.72 ± 0.5) × 10-23 eV.
Notice how M200 clusters around the value M200  5 × 1010 M .

Our strategy to demonstrate independence of the
mean value of ma,e on the details of the two realistic models SNFW and Burkert is to also determine
it from Eq. (5). To do this, we use the value of the
gravitational Bohr radius rB,e in Eq. (23) and the values of M200 extracted from RC fits within an ensemble of 80 SPARC galaxies to the Burkert model.

Figure 6: Frequency distribution of 80 axion masses
ma,e, extracted from the Burkert-model fits of M200 to the RCs of galaxies with a 2/d.o.f. < 1. The max-
imum of the smooth-kernel distribution (solid, blue line) is ma,e = (0.65 ± 0.4) × 10-23 eV (red, vertical line).

In our treatment Sec. 5 of cosmological and astro-

physical implications we appeal to the mean value of

Figure 4: Frequency distribution of the virial mass ma,e-extractions in the SNFW and the Burkert model

M200 in units of solar masses M from the 80 best- as fitting galaxies in the Burkert model. The maximum

ma,e = 0.675 × 10-23 eV .

(24)

of the distribution is at M200 = (2.9 ± 4) × 1010 M .

4 Galactic central regions and the dark sector of the Universe

Interpreting the dark-matter structure of a typical low-surface-brightness galaxy as an e-lump, we have rB,e = 0.26 kpc from the SNFW model, see Sec. 3.2. Therefore, the value of  in Eq. (9) is

 = 314 .

(25)

With ma,e = 0.675 × 10-23 eV Eq. (1) yields

Figure 5: Extracted virial masses M200 in units of

e = 287 eV .

(26)

solar masses from Burkert-model fits to 80 RCs with

2/d.o.f. < 1 vs. the respective galaxy's central sur- This is by only a factor 15 smaller than the scale

face brightness in units of L /pc2.

e = me/118.6 (me = 511 keV the mass of the elec-

tron) of an SU(2) Yang-Mills theory proposed in [54]

to originate the electron's mass in terms of a fuzzy ball

The result is characterised by Table 4 a) and b) of deconfining phase. There the deconfining region

in the apendix, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5. This yields a is immersed into the confining phase and formed by

9

10
Table 3. Burkert-model fits to the 17 best fitting SNFW-model galaxies. The purple arrow indicates the value of r0.

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

the selfintersection of a center-vortex loop. Consider- is given as

ing an undistorted Yang-Mills theory for simplicity1, the factor of 15 could be explained by a stronger screening of topological charge density ­ the origin

2 Tc = ma

na

2/3
.

 (3/2)

(28)

of the axial anomaly ­ in the confining ground state,

composed of round, pointlike center-vortex loops, We conclude from Eqs. (11), (13), (27) and (28) that

versus the deconfining thermal ground state, made of densely packed, spatially extended (anti)caloron centers subject to overlapping peripheries [25]. The

Tc,e  9.7 × 1030 GeV ,

Tc,µ  7.7 × 1039 GeV ,

(29)

factor of 15 so far is a purely phenomenological result (it could be expected to be O(100) or higher) which

Tc,  6.1 × 1042 GeV .

is plausible qualitatively because of the reduced topo- All three critical temperatures are comfortably larger logical charge density in the confining phase where than the Planck mass MP = 1.22 × 1019 GeV such

overlapping magnetic monopoles and antimonopoles, that throughout the Universe's expansion history and

aligned within hardly resolved center vortices, are the modulo depercolation, which generates a nonthermal

topological charge carriers. The complex interplay halo of particles correlated on the de Broglie wave

between the would-be Goldstone nature of the axion, length around a condensate core, the Bose-condensed

as prescribed by fermion interaction at the Planck state of e-, µ-, and  -axions is guaranteed and consis-

scale, and the topological charge density of an SU(2) tent with  1, compare with Eq. (12).

Yang-Mills theory deeply in its confining phase is

anything but understood quantitatively so far. One may hope that simulations of the axion potential in a center-vortex model of the confining phase, such a proposed in [64], will yield more quantitative insights in the future. The link between the masses of the three species of

We now turn back to question (i). Explicit lump masses can be obtained from Eqs. (11) based on the typical mass Me = 6.3 × 1010 M of an e-lump. One has
Mµ = 1.5 × 106 M ,

ultralight axions, whose fuzzy condensates form lumps of typical masses Me, Mµ, and M , with the three

M = 5.2 × 103 M .

(30)

lepton families via the Planck-scale originated axial For the computation of the respective gravitational

anomaly within confining phases of SU(2) Yang-Mills Bohr radii according to Eq. (5) both quantities, axion

theories is compelling. In particular, Me = M200 can mass ma,i and lump mass Mi, are required. To judge be determined by mild modelling of direct observation, the gravitational stability of a given isolated and un-

as done in Sec. 3, while Mµ and M are predicted merged lump throughout its evolution a comparison by an appeal to Eqs. (11). Such a scenario allows between the typical Bohr radius rB,i and the typical

to address two questions: (i) the implication of a Schwarzschild radius rSD,i, defined as

given lump's selfgravity for its stability and (ii) the cosmological origin of a given species of isolated lumps.

rSD,i



2Mi MP2

,

(31)

Before we discuss question (i) we would like to provide is in order. Using Me = 6.3×1010 M , Fig. 7 indicates a thermodynamical argument, based on our knowledge the implied values of the Bohr radii rB,e, rB,µ, and gained about axion and lump masses in terms of Yang- rB, by dots on the curves of all possible Bohr radii Mills scales and the Planck mass, why Planck-scale as functions of their lump masses when keeping the

axions associated with the lepton families always oc- axion mass ma,i fixed. Notice that for all three cases, cur in the form of fuzzy or homogeneous condensates. e-lumps, µ-lumps, and  -lumps, typical Bohr radii

Namely, the Yang-Mills scales e, µ = e mµ/me, are considerably larger than their Schwarzschild radii.

and  = e m /me together with Eqs. (1), (26), yield Indeed, from Eqs. (1), (10), and (31) it follows that

axion masses as ma,e  0.675 × 10-23 eV ,

rB = 1 2 .

(32)

rSD 2

ma,µ  2.89 × 10-19 eV , ma,  8.17 × 10-17 eV .

(27) With  = 314 we have rB/rSD = 4.92 × 104. An adiabatic pursuit of the solid lines in Fig. 7 down

to their intersections with the dashed line reveals

The critical temperature Tc for the Bose-Einstein con- that an increase of lump mass by a factor  222

densation of a quantum gas of free bosons of mass is required to reach the critical mass for black-hole

ma

and

(mean)

number

density

na



M

/(ma

4 3

rB3

)

formation. While this is unlikely to occur through

1The chiral dynamics at the Planck scale, which produces the axion field, to some extent resolves the ground states

of Yang-Mills theories: axions become massive by virtue of the anomaly because of this very resolution of topological

charge density.

11

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

mergers of e-lumps within their peers it is conceivable Interestingly, the lower mass bound of Eq. (33) is

for merging µ- and  -lumps, see below.

contained in the mass range (4.5 ± 0.4) × 106 M [59]

or (4.31 ± 0.36) × 106 M [58] of the central compact

The mean mass density of a lump scales with the object extracted from orbit analysis of S-stars.

fourth power of the Yang-Mills scale, see Eqs. (8),

(10), and (13). With the hierarchies in Yang-Mills Next, we discuss question (ii). Consider a situation

scales  /µ  17 or µ/e  200 it is conceivable where the gravitational Bohr radius rB exceeds the that sufficiently large number of lumps of a higher Hubble radius rH (z) = H-1(z) at some redshift z.

Yang-Mills scale, embedded into a lump of a lower Here H(z) defines the Hubble parameter subject to

scale, catalyse the latter's gravitational compaction a given cosmological model. In such a situation, the

to the point of collapse, see, however, discussion in lump acts like a homogeneous energy density (dark

Sec. 6.1.

energy) within the causally connected region of the

Universe roughly spanned by rH . If rB falls sizably below rH then formerly homogeneous energy density

may decay into isolated lumps. In order to predict at

which redshift zp such a depercolation epoch has taken place we rely on the extraction of the epoch zp,e = 53

in [16] for the depercolation of e-lumps. To extract

the depercolation redshifts zp,µ and zp, we use the

cosmological model SU(2)CMB proposed in [16] with parameters values given in column 2 of Table 2 of

that paper. In Fig. 8 the relative density parameters

of the cosmological model SU(2)CMB are depicted as functions of z, and the point of e-lump depercolation

zp,e = 53 is marked by the cusps in dark energy and

matter.

Figure 7: Schwarzschild radius (dashed line) and grav- The strategy to extract zp,µ and zp, out of informaitational Bohr radii (solid lines; dark blue: e-lump, tion collected at zp,e = 53 is to determine the ratio turquoise: µ-lump, and black:  -lump) as functions of e of rH = 16.4 Mpc at zp,e = 53 and rB,e = 0.26 kpc lump mass in units of solar mass M . The dots indi- for a typical, isolated, and unmerged e-lump as

cate lump masses which derive from the typical mass of an isolated e-lump Me = 6.3 × 1010 M suggested by the analysis of the RCs of low-surface-brightness
galaxies performed in Sec. 3.

e 

rH rB,e

z=zp,e

= 55, 476 .

(34)

With Eq. (11) we have Mµ/Me  2.3 × 10-5 such that a dark mass of the selfgravitating dark-matter disk of the Milky Way, exhibiting a radial scale of (7.5 · · · 8.85) kpc and a mass of MMW = (2 · · · 3) × 1011 M [60], would contain a few previously isolated but now merged e-lumps. This implies with Eqs. (11) a µ-lump mass of

It is plausible that e can be promoted to a universal (that is, independent of the Yang-Mills scale and
temperature) constant , again, because of the large
hierarchy between all Yang-Mills scales to the Planck
mass MP . Moreover, the ratio of radiation temperature to the Planck mass MP remains very small within the regime of redshifts considered in typical CMB sim-
ulations. Using the cosmological model SU(2)CMB, Eq. (13), and demanding  to set the condition for µ-

Mµ = (4.7 · · · 7) × 106 M .

(33) and  -lump depercolation (rH   rB,i), one obtains

In [60] the mass of the dark halo of the Milky Way,

zp,µ = 40.000, zp, = 685.000 .

(35)

which is virialised up to r  350 kpc, is determined
as 1.8 × 1012 M . In addition to the halo and the In Fig. 8 the relative density parameters  (dark disk, there is a ringlike dark-matter structure within energy), m for total matter (baryonic and dark), (13 · · · 18.5) kpc of mass (2.2 · · · 2.8) × 1010 M . Since r (total radiation), and the Hubble radius rH are these structures probably are, judged within the here- depicted as functions of z. Moreover, the redshifts of e-

discussed framework, due to contaminations of a seed- lump, µ-lump, and  -lump depercolations ­ zp,e, zp,µ, ing e-lump by the accretion of  - and µ-lumps we and zp, ­ are indicated by vertical lines intersecting ignore them in what follows. In any case, a virialised the z-axis. The depercolation epochs for µ- and  -

dark-matter halo of 350 kpc radial extent easily ac- lumps at redshifts zp,µ = 40, 000, and zp, = 685, 000 comodates the dark mass ratio  0.1 between the are not modelled within SU(2)CMB because the Uniselfgravitating dark-matter disk and the dark halo in verse then is radiation dominated.

terms of accreted  - and µ-lumps.

12

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

µ-lump depercolation there are roughly 300  -lumps
inside one µ-lump. Each of these  -lumps possesses a mass of M = 5.2 × 103 M . The implied accretion process involving additional  -lumps may catalyse the
gravitational compaction of the thus contaminated
µ-lump, see discussion in Sec. 5.1.

At zp,e = 53 e-lumps depercolate [16]. Again, disregarding local gravitational binding, we conclude

from Eq. (11) and a nearly equal contribution of

each lump species to the cosmological dark-matter

density [16] that the number densities of µ- and

Figure 8: Cosmological model SU(2)cmb of [16] (with  -lumps are by factors of (mµ/me)2  42, 750

parameter values fitted to the TT, TE, and EE CMB and (m /me)2  283 × 42, 750, respectively, larger Planck power spectra and taken from column 2 of than the number density of e-lumps. At e-lump

Table 2 of that paper) in terms of relative density pa- depercolation we thus have 42,750 µ-lumps and

rameters as functions of redshift z. Normalised density 42, 750 × 283  1.2 × 107  -lumps within one e-

parameters refer to dark energy (), to total mat- lump.

ter (baryonic and dark, m), and to radiation (three

flavours of massless neutrinos and eight relativistic po-

larisations in a CMB subject to SU(2)CMB, r). The red dotted line represents the Hubble radius of this

Again, ignoring local gravitational binding effects, the dilution of  - and µ-lump densities by cosmological

model. The redshifts of e-lump, µ-lump, and  -lump expansion predicts that today we have 42, 750/(zp,e +

depercolations are indicated by vertical lines intersect- 1)3 = 0.27 µ-lumps and 42, 750 × 283/(zp,e + 1)3 = 77

ing the z-axis. Only e-lump depercolation is taken  -lumps within one e-lump. Local gravitational bind-

into account explicitly within the cosmological model ing should correct these numbers to higher values

SU(2)cmb since at zp,µ = 40, 000 and zp, = 685, 000 but the orders of magnitude ­ O(1) for µ-lumps and

the Universe is radiation dominated.

O(100) for  -lumps ­ should remain unaffected. It

is conspicuous that the number of globular clusters

In Fig. 9 a schematic evolution of the Universe's within the Milky Way is in the hundreds [65], with

dark sector, subject to the SU(2) Yang-Mills theo- typical masses between ten to several hundred thou-

ries SU(2) , SU(2)µ, SU(2)e, and SU(2)CMB invoking Planck-scale induced axial anomalies, is depicted.

sand solar masses [59]. With M = 5.2 × 103 M it is plausible that the dark-mass portion of these

clusters is constituted by a single or a small number

After a possible epoch of Planck-scale inflation and of merged  -lumps. In addition, in the Milky Way

reheating the temperature of the radiation domi- there is one central massive and dark object with

nated Universe is close to the Planck mass MP , and about (4.5 ± 0.4) × 106 [59] or (4.31 ± 0.36) × 106 solar rH  MP-1. In this situation, the Bohr radii of masses [58]. If, indeed, there is roughly one isolated

the various hypothetical lump species (Peccei-Quinn µ-lump per isolated e-lump today then the mass range

scale MP , SU(2) , SU(2)µ, SU(2)e, and SU(2)CMB of the Milky Way's dark-matter disk, interpreted as

Yang-Mills dynamics) are much larger than rH , and a merger of few isolated e-lumps, implies the mass

the (marginal) dark sector of the model then solely range of Eq. (33) for the associated µ-lump merger.

contains dark energy. Around zp, = 685, 000 (ra- This range contains the mass of the central massive

diation domination) the depercolation of  -lumps and dark object determined in [58, 59].

occurs for   rH /rB,  55, 500. Once released,

they evolve like pressureless, non-relativistic particles and, cosmologically seen, represent dark matter.

5

Discussion, Summary, and Outlook

5.1 Speculations on origins of Milky Way's

As the Universe expands further, the ratio  

structure

rH /rB,µ  55, 500 is reached such that µ-lumps start

to depercolate at zp,µ = 40, 000. Since they contribute The results of Sec. 5 on mass ranges of  -lumps, µ-

to the cosmological dark-matter density roughly the lumps, and e-lumps being compatible with typical

same amount like  -lumps, see [16] for a fit of so- masses of globular clusters, the mass of the central

called primordial and emergent dark-matter densities compact Galactic object [58, 59], and the mass of the

to TT, TE, and EE power spectra of the 2015 Planck selfgravitating dark-matter disk of the Milky Way,

data, one concludes from Eq. (11) that their number respectively, is compelling. We expect that similar

density is by a factor (m /mµ)2  283 smaller than assignments can be made to according structures in

that of  -lumps. For a first estimate this assumes a other spiral galaxies.

neglect of local gravitational interactions. That is, at

13

Figure 9: The evolution of the Universe's dark sector according to SU(2) Yang-Mills theories of scales
e = me/(15 × 118.6), µ = mµ/(15 × 118.6),  = m /(15 × 118.6) (confining phases, screened), and CMB  10-4 eV (deconfining phase, unscreened) invoking Planck-scale induced axial anomalies. The horizon size, set by the Hubble radius rH at various epochs 1) - 5), is shown by a red circumference. At epoch 1) gravity induced chiral symmetry breaking at the Planck scale creates a would-be-Goldstone boson which,
due to the axial anomaly, gives rise to four ultralight axionic particle species. Their gravitational Bohr radii
rB, , rB,µ, rB,e, and rB,CMB are much larger than rH . Therefore, the associated energy densities should be interpreted as dark energy. 2) As the radiation dominated Universe expands the smallest Bohr radius
rB, falls below rH . Once the ratio   rH /rB, is sufficiently large ( = 55, 500)  -lumps depercolate (zp, = 685, 000). 3) As the Universe expands further the Bohr radius rB,µ falls below rH . When the ratio of rH and rB,µ again equals about  = 55, 500 µ-lumps derpercolate (zp,µ = 40, 000). The cosmological matter densities of  and µ-lumps are comparable [16]. Since the mass of an isolated, unmerged  -lump is by a factor of about (m /mµ)2  283 smaller than the mass of an isolated, unmerged µ-lump it then follows that the number density of  -lumps is by this factor larger compared to the number density of µ-lumps. 4) Upon
continued expansion down to redshift zp,e = 53 e-lumps depercolate. Their number density is by a factor of (mµ/me)2  42, 750 smaller than the number density of µ-lumps. 5) The value of rB,CMB is vastly larger than rH (z = 0): rB,CMB = 2.4 × 1010 Mpc vs. rH (z = 0) = 4038 Mpc. Therefore, a depercolation of CMB-lumps up to the present is excluded. As a consequence, the condensate of CMB-axions is dark energy. 6) Possible
dark-matter configuration of a galaxy including  -lumps and a single µ-lump inside an e-lump.

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

Could the origin of the central compact object in derives from knowledge of the axion mass ma,i. EmpirMilky Way be the result of  - and µ-lump mergers? ically, the here-extracted screened scale e = 287 eV

As Fig. 7 suggests, a merger of n  222 isolated  - or points to the first lepton family, compare with [54].

µ-lumps are required for black hole formation. Since This enables predictions of typical lump and axion

we know that the mass of the central compact object masses in association with two additional SU(2) Yang-

is  4 × 106M a merger of n  222 µ-lumps is ex- Mills theories associating with µ and  leptons.

cluded for Milky Way. Thus only a merger of n  222

 -lumps, possibly catalysed by the consumption of a few µ-lumps, is a viable candidate for black-hole formation in our Galaxy. Such a process ­ merging of several hundred  -lumps within the gravitational field of a few merging µ-lumps down to the point of gravitational collapse ­ would be consistent with the results of [58, 59] who fit stellar orbits around the central massive object of Milky Way extremely well to a single-point-mass potential. Indeed, the gravitational Bohr radius of a µ-lump is7 × 10-6 kpc while the closest approach of an S2 star to the gravitational center of the central massive object of Milky Way is 17 lh = 5.8 × 10-7 kpc [58]. Therefore, µ-lumps need to collapse in order to be consistent with a point-mass potential.

Even though the emergence of axion mass [24] and the existence of lepton families [54] are governed by the same SU(2) gauge principle, the interactions between these ultra-light pseudo scalars and visible leptonic matter is extremely feeble. Thus the hereproposed relation between visible and dark matter could demystify the dark Universe. An important aspect of Planck-scale axions is their Bose-Einstein, yet non-thermal, condensed state. A selfgravitating, isolated fuzzy condensate (lump) of a given axion species i = e, µ,  is chiefly characterised by the gravitational Bohr radius rB,i [35] given in terms of the axion mass ma,i and the lump mass Mi = M200,i (virial mass), see Eq. 5. As it turns out, for i = e the information about the latter two parameters is

contained in observable rotation curves of low-surface-

The Milky Way's contamination with baryons, its brightness galaxies with similar extents. Realistic

comparably large dark-disk mass vs. the mass of the models for the dark-matter density profiles derive from

low-surface-brightness galaxies analysed in Sec. 3, and ground-state solutions of the spherically symmetric

possibly tidal shear from the dark ring and the dark Poisson-Schr¨odinger system at zero temperature and

halo during its evolution introduce deviations from the for a single axion species. These solutions describe

simple structure of a typical low-surface-brightness selfgravitating fuzzy axion condensates, compare with

galaxy. Simulations, which take all the here-discussed [46]. Two such models, the Soliton-NFW and the

components into account, could indicate how typical Burkert model, were employed in our present extrac-

such structures are, rather independently of primor- tions of ma,e and Me under the assumption that the

dial density perturbations.

dark-matter density in a typical low-surface bright-

ness galaxy is dominated by a single axion species.

Isolated  -, µ-, and e-lumps, which did not accrete sufficiently many baryons to be directly visible, com-

Our result ma,e = 0.675 × 10-23 eV is consistent with the result of [48]: ma,e = 0.554 × 10-23 eV. Inter-

prise dark-matter galaxies that are interspersed in between visible galaxies. The discovery of such dark

estingly, such an axion mass is close to the result 10-25 eV  ma  10-24 eV [52] obtained by treat-

galaxies, pinning down their merger-physics, and de- ing axions as a classical ideal gas of non-relativistic

terminations of their substructure by gravitational particles ­ in stark contrast to the Bose condensed

microlensing and gravitational-wave astronomy could state suggested by Eq. 28 or the gas surrounding

support the here-proposed scenario of active structure it with intrinsic correlations governed by large de-

formation on sub-galactic scales.

Broglie wavelengths. This value of the axion mass

is considerably lower then typical lower bounds ob-

tained in the literature: ma > 2.9 × 10-21 eV [50],

5.2 Summary and Outlook

ma = 2.5+-32..60 × 10-21 eV [38], ma > 3.8 × 10-21 eV

In this paper we propose that the dark Universe can

[53], and ma  8 × 10-23 eV in [46]. We propose that this discrepancy could be due to the omission

be understood in terms of axial anomalies [20, 21, 22] of the other two axion species with a mass spectrum

which are invoked by screened Yang-Mills scales in given by Eqs. (27). For example, the dark-matter

association with the leptonic mass spectrum. This and thus baryonic density variations along the line

produces three ultra-light axion species. Such pseudo of sight probed by a Lyman- forest do not refer to

Nambu-Goldstone bosons are assumed to owe their gravitationally bound systems and therefore should

very existence to a gravitationally induced chiral sym- be influenced by all three axion species.

metry breaking with a universal Peccei-Quinn scale

[24] of order the Planck mass MP = 1.22 × 1019 GeV [29]. We therefore refer to each of these particle Once axions and their lumps are categorised, ques-

species as Planck-scale axions. Because of the rela- tions about (i) the cosmological origin of lumps and

tion ma,i = 2i /MP the screened Yang-Mills scale i (ii) their role in the evolution of galactic structure

15

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

can be asked. Point (i) is addressed by consulting a Milky Way [58, 59] and globular clusters [60], respec-

cosmological model (SU(2)CMB [16]) which requires tively. Within a given galaxy such active components

the emergence of dark matter by lump depercolation of structure formation possibly originate compact

at defined redshifts, see also [66]. Depercolation of stellar streams through tidal forces acting on  -lumps.

e-lumps at redshift zp,e = 53 anchors the deperco- Whether this is supported by observation could be delations of the two other lump species. One obtains cided by a confrontation of N-body simulations (stars)

zp,µ = 40, 000 and zp, = 685, 000.

in the selfgravitating background of the externally

The critical temperature Tc,e of SU(2)e for the deformed lump.

deconfining-preconfining phase transition (roughly

equal to the temperature of the Hagedorn transition Apart from cosmological and astrophysical observa-

to the confining phase [25]) is Tc,e = 9.49 keV [54]. tion, which should increasingly be able to judge the

A question arises whether this transition could af- viability of the here-proposed scenario, there are al-

fect observable small-scale angular features of the ternative terrestrial experiments which can check the

CMB. In the SU(2)CMB based cosmological model predictions of the underlying SU(2) gauge-theory pat-

of [16] Tc,e = 9.49 keV corresponds to a redshift tern. Let us quote two examples: First, there is a

of zc,e = 6.4 × 107. (Typically, CMB simulation predicted low-frequency spectral black-body anomaly

are initialised at z = 109 [67]). Traversing the at low temperatures (T  5 K) [68] which could be

preconfining-deconfining phase transition at zc,e an al- searched for with a relatively low instrumental effort.

ready strongly radiation dominated Universe receives Second, an experimental link to SU(2)e would be the

additional radiation density and entropy. However, detection of the Hagedorn transition in a plasma at

we expect that the horizon crossing of curvature per- electron temperature 9.49 keV and the stabilisation of

turbation at z > zc,e, which may influence small-scale a macroscopically large plasma ball at a temperature

matter perturbations, will affect CMB anisotropies on of 1.3 × 9.49 keV [54]. Such electron temperatures

angular scales l > 3000 only. Therefore, Silk damping should be attainable by state-of-the-art nuclear-fusion

would reduce the magnitudes of these multipoles to experiments such as ITER or by fusion experiments

below the observational errors.

with inertial plasma confinement.

Up to the present, lump depercolation does not occur for the Planck-scale axion species associated with SU(2)CMB: Here the gravitational Bohr radius of the axion condensate always exceeds the Hubble radius by many orders of magnitude. As for point (ii), the masses and Bohr radii of µ- and  -lumps seem to be related with the central massive compact object of the

6 Data availability
The SPARC library was analysed in support of this research [62]. The processed data and program underlying this article will be shared on request to the corresponding author.

References
[1] V. C. Rubin and J. Ford, W.Kent, "Rotation of the Andromeda Nebula from a Spectroscopic Survey of Emission Regions," Astrophys. J., vol. 159, pp. 379­403, 1970.
[2] F. Zwicky, "On the Masses of Nebulae and of Clusters of Nebulae," Astrophys. J., vol. 86, p. 217, 1937.
[3] W. Tucker, P. Blanco, S. Rappoport, L. David, D. Fabricant, E. E. Falco, W. Forman, A. Dressler, and M. Ramella, "1e 0657-56: A contender for the hottest known cluster of galaxies," Astrophys. J., vol. 496, p. L5, Mar 1998.
[4] D. Clowe, M. Bradac, A. H. Gonzalez, M. Markevitch, S. W. Randall, C. Jones, and D. Zaritsky, "A direct empirical proof of the existence of dark matter," Astrophys. J., vol. 648, p. L109, Aug 2006.
[5] P. de Bernardis, P. A. R. Ade, J. J. Bock, J. R. Bond, J. Borrill, A. Boscaleri, K. Coble, B. P. Crill, G. De Gasperis, P. C. Farese, and et al., "A flat universe from high-resolution maps of the cosmic microwave background radiation," Nature, vol. 404, p. 955, Apr 2000.
[6] A. G. Riess, A. V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiatti, A. Diercks, P. M. Garnavich, R. L. Gilliland, C. J. Hogan, S. Jha, R. P. Kirshner, and et al., "Observational evidence from supernovae for an accelerating universe and a cosmological constant," Astron. J., vol. 116, p. 1009, Sep 1998.
[7] S. Perlmutter et al., "Measurements of  and  from 42 high redshift supernovae," Astrophys. J., vol. 517, pp. 565­586, 1999.
[8] L. Verde, T. Treu, and A. G. Riess, "Tensions between the early and late universe," Nature Astron., vol. 3, p. 891, Sep 2019.

16

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

[9] N. Aghanim et al., "Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters," A&A, vol. 641, p. A6, 2020.
[10] M. J. Reid, D. W. Pesce, and A. G. Riess, "An improved distance to ngc 4258 and its implications for the hubble constant," Astrophys. J., vol. 886, p. L27, Nov 2019.
[11] A. G. Riess, S. Casertano, W. Yuan, L. Macri, J. Anderson, J. W. MacKenty, J. B. Bowers, K. I. Clubb, A. V. Filippenko, D. O. Jones, and et al., "New parallaxes of galactic cepheids from spatially scanning thehubble space telescope: Implications for the hubble constant," Astrophys. J., vol. 855, p. 136, Mar 2018.
[12] K. C. Wong et al., "H0LiCOW IV. Lens mass model of HE 0435-1223 and blind measurement of its time-delay distance for cosmology," MNRAS, vol. 465, no. 4, pp. 4895­4913, 2017.
[13] T. Abbott, F. Abdalla, A. Alarcon, J. Aleksi´c, S. Allam, S. Allen, A. Amara, J. Annis, J. Asorey, S. Avila, and et al., "Dark energy survey year 1 results: Cosmological constraints from galaxy clustering and weak lensing," Phys. Rev. D., vol. 98, Aug 2018.
[14] M. Troxel, N. MacCrann, J. Zuntz, T. Eifler, E. Krause, S. Dodelson, D. Gruen, J. Blazek, O. Friedrich, S. Samuroff, and et al., "Dark energy survey year 1 results: Cosmological constraints from cosmic shear," Phys. Rev. D., vol. 98, Aug 2018.
[15] T. Tr¨oster, A. G. S´anchez, M. Asgari, C. Blake, M. Crocce, C. Heymans, H. Hildebrandt, B. Joachimi, S. Joudaki, A. Kannawadi, and et al., "Cosmology from large-scale structure," A&A, vol. 633, p. L10, Jan 2020.
[16] S. Hahn, R. Hofmann, and D. Kramer, "SU(2)CMB and the cosmological model: angular power spectra," MNRAS, vol. 482, no. 4, p. 4290, 2019.
[17] E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, The Early Universe, Taylor and Francis. CRC Press, 1990.
[18] D. Akerib et al., "First results from the LUX dark matter experiment at the Sanford Underground Research Facility," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 112, p. 091303, 2014.
[19] D. Akerib et al., "Projected WIMP sensitivity of the LUX-ZEPLIN dark matter experiment," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 101, no. 5, p. 052002, 2020.
[20] S. L. Adler and W. A. Bardeen, "Absence of higher order corrections in the anomalous axial vector divergence equation," Phys. Rev., vol. 182, pp. 1517­1536, 1969.
[21] J. Bell and R. Jackiw, "A PCAC puzzle: 0   in the  model," Nuovo Cim. A, vol. 60, pp. 47­61, 1969.
[22] K. Fujikawa, "Path Integral Measure for Gauge Invariant Fermion Theories," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 42, pp. 1195­1198, 1979.
[23] H. Atherton et al., "DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF THE LIFETIME OF THE NEUTRAL PION," Phys. Lett. B, vol. 158, pp. 81­84, 1985.
[24] R. Peccei and H. R. Quinn, "Constraints Imposed by CP Conservation in the Presence of Instantons," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 16, pp. 1791­1797, 1977.
[25] R. Hofmann, The thermodynamics of quantum Yang-Mills theory: Theory and applications, 2nd edition. World Scientific, 01 2016.
[26] P. Candelas and D. J. Raine, "General-relativistic quantum field theory: An exactly soluble model," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 12, p. 965, Aug 1975.
[27] J. A. Frieman, C. T. Hill, A. Stebbins, and I. Waga, "Cosmology with ultralight pseudo Nambu-Goldstone bosons," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 75, pp. 2077­2080, 1995.
[28] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, "Ultraviolet Behavior of Nonabelian Gauge Theories," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 30, pp. 1343­1346, 1973.
[29] F. Giacosa, R. Hofmann, and M. Neubert, "A model for the very early Universe," JHEP, vol. 02, p. 077, 2008.
[30] D. H. Weinberg, J. S. Bullock, F. Governato, R. Kuzio de Naray, and A. H. G. Peter, "Cold dark matter: Controversies on small scales," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 112, no. 40, pp. 12249­12255, 2015.
[31] J. S. Bullock, T. S. Kolatt, Y. Sigad, R. S. Somerville, A. V. Kravtsov, A. A. Klypin, J. R. Primack, and A. Dekel, "Profiles of dark haloes. Evolution, scatter, and environment," Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., vol. 321, pp. 559­575, 2001.
17

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

[32] J. F. Navarro, C. S. Frenk, and S. D. White, "A Universal density profile from hierarchical clustering," Astrophys. J., vol. 490, pp. 493­508, 1997.
[33] M. R. Baldeschi, R. Ruffini, and G. B. Gelmini, "ON MASSIVE FERMIONS AND BOSONS IN GALACTIC HALOS," Phys. Lett. B, vol. 122, pp. 221­224, 1983.
[34] M. Membrado, A. F. Pacheco, and J. San~udo, "Hartree solutions for the self-Yukawian boson sphere," Phys. Rev. A, vol. 39, no. 8, p. 4207, 1989.
[35] S. Ji and S.-J. Sin, "Late-time phase transition and the galactic halo as a bose liquid: (ii) the effect of visible matter," Phys. Rev. D., vol. 50, 09 1994.
[36] W. J. G. de Blok, S. S. McGaugh, and V. C. Rubin, "High-Resolution Rotation Curves of Low Surface Brightness Galaxies. II. Mass Models," Astron. J., vol. 122, pp. 2396­2427, 2001.
[37] R. Kuzio de Naray, S. S. McGaugh, and W. J. G. de Blok, "Mass Models for Low Surface Brightness Galaxies with High Resolution Optical Velocity Fields," Astrophys. J., vol. 676, pp. 920­943, 2008.
[38] A. Maleki, S. Baghram, and S. Rahvar, "Constraint on the mass of fuzzy dark matter from the rotation curve of the Milky Way," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 101, no. 10, p. 103504, 2020.
[39] M. S. Pawlowski and P. Kroupa, "The Vast Polar Structure of the Milky Way Attains New Members," Astrophys. J., vol. 790, p. 74, 2014.
[40] L. A. Martinez-Medina, V. H. Robles, and T. Matos, "Dwarf galaxies in multistate scalar field dark matter halos," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 91, p. 023519, Jan 2015.
[41] J. Magana and T. Matos, "A brief Review of the Scalar Field Dark Matter model," J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 378, p. 012012, 2012.
[42] A. Su´arez, V. H. Robles, and T. Matos, "A Review on the Scalar Field/Bose-Einstein Condensate Dark Matter Model," Astrophys. Space Sci. Proc., vol. 38, pp. 107­142, 2014.
[43] T. Matos and V. H. Robles, "Scalar field (wave) dark matter," 2016.
[44] D. J. E. Marsh, "Axion Cosmology," Phys. Rept., vol. 643, pp. 1­79, 2016.
[45] L. Hui, J. P. Ostriker, S. Tremaine, and E. Witten, "Ultralight scalars as cosmological dark matter," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 95, no. 4, p. 043541, 2017.
[46] H.-Y. Schive, T. Chiueh, and T. Broadhurst, "Cosmic Structure as the Quantum Interference of a Coherent Dark Wave," Nature Phys., vol. 10, pp. 496­499, 2014.
[47] N. C. Amorisco and A. Loeb, "First constraints on Fuzzy Dark Matter from the dynamics of stellar streams in the Milky Way," arXiv, 8 2018.
[48] T. Bernal, L. M. Fern´andez-Hern´andez, T. Matos, and M. A. Rodr´iguez-Meza, "Rotation curves of high-resolution LSB and SPARC galaxies with fuzzy and multistate (ultralight boson) scalar field dark matter," Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., vol. 475, no. 2, pp. 1447­1468, 2018.
[49] M. S. Pawlowski, "The Vast Polar Structure of the Milky Way and Filamentary Accretion of Sub-Halos," in 13th Marcel Grossmann Meeting on Recent Developments in Theoretical and Experimental General Relativity, Astrophysics, and Relativistic Field Theories, pp. 1724­1726, 2015.
[50] E. O. Nadler et al., "Milky Way Satellite Census ­ II. Galaxy-Halo Connection Constraints Including the Impact of the Large Magellanic Cloud," Astrophys. J., vol. 893, p. 48, 2020.
[51] K. I. Caputi, O. Ilbert, C. Laigle, H. J. McCracken, O. Le F`evre, J. Fynbo, B. Milvang-Jensen, P. Capak, M. Salvato, and Y. Taniguchi, "Spitzer bright, UltraVISTA faint sources in COSMOS: the contribution to the overall population of massive galaxies at z=3-7," Astrophys. J., vol. 810, no. 1, p. 73, 2015.
[52] R. Hlozek, D. J. E. Marsh, and D. Grin, "Using the full power of the cosmic microwave background to probe axion dark matter," Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. 476, p. 3063­3085, Feb 2018.
[53] V. Irsic, M. Viel, M. G. Haehnelt, J. S. Bolton, and G. D. Becker, "First constraints on fuzzy dark matter from Lyman- forest data and hydrodynamical simulations," Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 119, no. 3, p. 031302, 2017.
[54] R. Hofmann, "The isolated electron: De Broglie's "hidden" thermodynamics, SU(2) Quantum Yang-Mills theory, and a strongly perturbed BPS monopole," Entropy, vol. 19, p. 575, 2017.
[55] R. Hofmann, "Relic photon temperature versus redshift and the cosmic neutrino background," Annalen Phys., vol. 527, p. 254, 2015.
18

Axial Anomaly in Galaxies and the Dark Universe

A Preprint

[56] R. H. Becker, X. Fan, R. L. White, M. A. Strauss, V. K. Narayanan, R. H. Lupton, J. E. Gunn, J. Annis, N. A. Bahcall, J. Brinkmann, and et al., "Evidence for reionization at z  6: Detection of a gunn-peterson trough in a z = 6.28 quasar," The Astronomical Journal, vol. 122, p. 2850­2857, Dec 2001.
[57] A. Burkert, "The structure of dark matter halos in dwarf galaxies," The Astrophysical Journal, vol. 447, Jul 1995.
[58] S. Gillessen, F. Eisenhauer, S. Trippe, T. Alexander, R. Genzel, F. Martins, and T. Ott, "Monitoring stellar orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center," Astrophys. J., vol. 692, p. 1075, 2009.
[59] A. Ghez et al., "Measuring Distance and Properties of the Milky Way's Central Supermassive Black Hole with Stellar Orbits," Astrophys. J., vol. 689, pp. 1044­1062, 2008.
[60] P. Kalberla, L. Dedes, J. Kerp, and U. Haud, "Dark matter in the Milky Way, II. the HI gas distribution as a tracer of the gravitational potential," A&A, vol. 469, p. 511, 2007.
[61] N. Bar, D. Blas, K. Blum, and S. Sibiryakov, "Galactic rotation curves versus ultralight dark matter: Implications of the soliton-host halo relation," Phys. Rev. D, vol. 98, Oct 2018.
[62] F. Lelli, S. S. McGaugh, and J. M. Schombert, "SPARC: Mass Models for 175 Disk Galaxies with Spitzer Photometry and Accurate Rotation Curves," Astron. J., vol. 152, p. 157, 2016.
[63] V. H. Robles and T. Matos, "Flat Central Density Profile and Constant DM Surface Density in Galaxies from Scalar Field Dark Matter," MNRAS, vol. 422, pp. 282­289, 2012.
[64] M. Engelhardt, "Center vortex model for the infrared sector of Yang-Mills theory: Topological susceptibility," Nucl. Phys. B, vol. 585, p. 614, 2000.
[65] W. E. Harris, "A new catalog of globular clusters in the milky way," 2010.
[66] R. Hofmann, "An SU(2) Gauge Principle for the Cosmic Microwave Background: Perspectives on the Dark Sector of the Cosmological Model," Universe, vol. 6, no. 9, p. 135, 2020.
[67] C.-P. Ma and E. Bertschinger, "Cosmological perturbation theory in the synchronous and conformal newtonian gauges," The Astrophysical Journal, vol. 455, p. 7, Dec 1995.
[68] R. Hofmann, "Low-frequency line temperatures of the CMB," Annalen Phys., vol. 18, p. 634, 2009.

19

REFERENCES

20

Table 4 a). Burkert model: Galaxy name, Hubble Type, 2/d.o.f., luminosity, axion mass ma, r200, virial mass M200, core density 0, and core radius r0. In the blue frame the 17 galaxies used for the SNFW fit are highlighted.

REFERENCES

21

Table 4 b). Burkert model with 2/d.o.f. < 1: Galaxy name, Hubble Type, 2/d.o.f., luminosity, axion mass ma, r200, virial mass M200, core density 0, and core radius r0 (ordered as in the SPARC library).

