Low-Light Shadow Imaging using Quantum-Noise Detection with a Camera
Savannah L. Cuozzo, Nikunjkumar Prajapati, Irina Novikova, and Eugeniy E. Mikhailov Department of Physics, William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia 23187, USA
Pratik J. Barge, Narayan Bhusal, Hwang Lee, and Lior Cohen Department of Physics, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA
(Dated: June 3, 2021)
We experimentally demonstrate an imaging technique based on quantum noise modifications after interaction with an opaque object. This approach is particularly attractive for applications requiring weak illumination. We implement a homodyne-like detection scheme which allows us to eliminate detrimental effects of the camera's dark noise. Here we illuminate the object with squeezed vacuum containing less than one photon per frame, generated in an atomic ensemble, and reconstruct the shape of the object with higher contrast than the direct intensity imaging using 1000 times more photons.

arXiv:2106.00785v1 [quant-ph] 1 Jun 2021

Several applications require imaging with low-light illumination where counting individual photons becomes necessary. The accuracy of such detection is then determined by the photon statistics and by technical noise, such as laser intensity fluctuations or the detector dark noise, and normally requires a long exposure time to allow for statistical averaging. We experimentally demonstrate an imaging technique based on analyzing the quantum noise distribution after a quadrature-squeezed vacuum interacts with an opaque object. This works because the noise statistics of the quantum state are modified. Our homodyne-like detection scheme allows us to eliminate the detrimental effects of the camera's dark noise while keeping the probing intensity low. This approach is particularly attractive for applications requiring weak illumination since the squeezed vacuum inherently has very few photons illuminating the object. Our method outperforms coherent (laser) illumination with the same total number of photons when the detection noise is limited by the camera's dark noise.
Quantum imaging [1­5], which allows improvement of photon fluctuations utilizing non-classical correlation of optical fields, often outperforms its classical counterpart by suppressing the uncertainty in the photon number measurements. Many recent realizations of quantum imaging use two-mode optical fields with correlated intensity fluctuations generated either through parametric down conversion [6­9] or four-wave mixing in an atomic vapor [10­14]. If an object is placed in one of the optical beams, its shape can be recreated with sub-shot-noise accuracy by subtracting the intensity images of the two quantum-correlated beams. However, the average intensity of each beam puts limits on the acceptable level of the dark noise. Compared to typical photon-counting detectors, CCD cameras often present a challenge for imaging weak optical fields due to their relatively slow frame rate (this makes it harder to mitigate low-frequency technical noises) and their intrinsic dark noise [14, 15].
 eemikh@wm.edu

FIG. 1. A conceptual representation of the traditional intensity imaging and the proposed quantum shadow imaging. Both schemes rely on camera images of the probe and reference beams to create the transmission map of an object. However, the quantum shadow method uses the average quantum fluctuations of the probe and reference fields, amplified by a local oscillator, as opposed to the more traditional intensity ratio maps, susceptible to the camera's dark noise. The traditional reference/probe maps are on a photon count scale, while the quantum shadow reference/probe maps are on a dB scale.
We use a quadrature squeezed vacuum field [16­19], containing very few photons on average; when such a field interacts with an opaque object, its quantum fluctuations in the obstructed zone are replaced with a regular vacuum. To record the spatial distribution of the resulting noise quadrature without being affected by the camera dark noise, we mix the quantum probe with a classical local oscillator field to amplify its quantum noise, thus realizing a camera-based balanced homodyne detection scheme. This approach allows us to image the fields with as low as one photon per frame and yet obtain spatial details of the object with significantly less acquisition time, making it attractive to e.g. non-destructive imaging of biological samples [20]. Moreover, in such a method, we can use an anti-squeezed quadrature - increasing the tolerance to optical losses.
The concept of the proposed method is illustrate in

2

Fig. 1, where it is also contrasted with a traditional intensity-based measurement. A CCD camera detects the number of photons incident on each pixel, N , on top of its internal dark noise Nd. For a standard intensity measurement, the boundary between a fully illuminated region (the average photocounts N + Nd ) and a fully blocked region (the average photocounts Nd ) can be distinguished by the difference between these two photocount values. Moreover, we can estimate the signal-tonoise of such traditional measurements as

N¯

SNRt = N¯ + 2(Nd)2 ,

(1)

where N¯ is an average photon number detected per pixel (or detection area), and Nd is the variance of the dark noise counts.
We propose instead to measure the normalized variance, V , of the quadrature X = cos()X1 + sin()X2, where X1 = a + a, X2 = i(a - a), and a(a) is the creation(annihilation) operator for the photon state. In this case a similar boundary between the light and darkness can be detected via the deviation of the noise variance for the region illuminated by a quantum probe from unity - the noise variance of the coherent vacuum. This method does not work for a coherent illuminating state because the quadrature variance is unchanged by the loss. For example, if an experiment uses a squeezed vacuum with the squeezing parameter r, the expected variance value for the squeezed and anti-squeezed quadratures are V = e2r, correspondingly. We can also estimate the noise of such measurements by calculating the variance of the corresponding variance values for such a squeezed vacuum field, yielding the following theoretical signal-tonoise ratio:

V -1

SNRq

=

 2+

2V 2

(2)

Note, that for this calculation we can neglect the camera dark noise thanks to the homodyne detection. As a result, we can compare the performance of the two approaches as a ratio of the two signal to noise values for an anti-squeezed vacuum field, and a coherent beam with similar average number of photons N¯ = sinh2(r) 1:

SNRq

=

e2r 

-1

SNRt

2 + 2e4r

sinh2(r) + 2(Nd)2 sinh2(r)

(3)

1

+

2(Nd)2 N¯

It is easy to see that in the limit of the small photon number N¯ 1, the two methods perform equally well in the case of vanishing dark noise; however, if the dark noise becomes comparable with the average photon number, the advantage of the quantum noise-based measurement becomes more obvious.

To reconstruct the image of the object, we calculate a
transmission map T (x), where x is the position of the de-
tection area, traditionally calculated as a ratio of the average photon numbers in probe (N¯p) and reference (N¯r) beams:

Tt(x)

=

N¯p(x) N¯r (x)

.

(4)

However, if the recorded images are overwhelmed by the dark noise, the resulting transmission maps are very noisy, as shown in Fig. 1. At the same time, we can produce a better quality transmission map from the quantum noise measurements, since our detection method, reduces the detrimental effect of the dark noise. We can connect the measured field variance, V (x) to the object transmission, T (x) (see Ref. [21] and supplementary materials for detailed derivations):

V (x) = 1 + (e±2r - 1)|O(x)|2 × T (x).

(5)

where O(x) = A uLOuSqV dA is the overlap between the spatial modes of the local oscillator, uLO, and the squeezed vacuum mode, uSqV , and A is the detection area at location x. For the reference beam, where the object is removed, we assume T = 1 everywhere. For the mode-matched local oscillator and quantum probe, we arrive at the following expression of the transmission map using measured quadrature noise variance Vp and Vr in the probe and reference beams, correspondingly:

Tq (x)

=

Vp(x) Vr (x)

- -

1 .
1

(6)

Note that our method of transmission calculation is agnostic to the choice of the squeezed or anti-squeezed quadrature. In this experiment, we work with antisqueezed quadrature, since it is more robust to the optical losses.
To experimentally demonstrate the capabilities of quantum shadow imaging with the squeezed vacuum, we chose a completely opaque rectangle as our mask to block approximately one quadrant of the probe beam as our test object to be inserted only in the squeezed vacuum channel (see Fig. 1). Fig. 2 shows the examples of measured variance maps for both reference and probe beams for different detection areas (see supplementary material for how we determine the detection area). Fig. 2 (column four) shows a cross-section of the experimental quantum shadow transmission map at the location of the red line and compares it with the calculated transmission map of an ideal noiseless beam sampled with the same detection area of radius R. When the radius (R) of the sampling area is small (top) it is impossible to see the quantum shadow, since the detected quantum statistics is indistinguishable from a shot-noise limited beam [22]. However, as we increase detection area radius (top to bottom rows), the difference in quantum statistics between the blocked and open regions of the mask becomes

3

FIG. 2. The first column (a, e, i, m) shows the noise maps (defined with Eq. 5) of the squeezed vacuum with no objects in the vacuum port. The second column (b, f, j, n) shows the noise maps for the squeezed vacuum with the mask in the vacuum port. The third column (c, g, k, o) shows the transmission map, T, as defined in Eq. 6. In the final column, the black line shows transmissions through the mask in the T maps where the red line contrasts the noiseless classical intensity cross-section through the same region for the same detection area. The first row (a, b, c, d) has a detection area with a radius of R = 1, the second row (e, f, g, h) has a detection area of R = 5, the third row (i, j, k, l) has a detection area with a radius of R = 10, and the last row (m, n, o, p) has a detection area with a radius of R = 15. The reference and probe maps are on a dB scale.

FIG. 3. Traditional imaging with 250 photons per frame. The first column (a, e, i, m) shows the ordinary intensity image of the beam with no objects in the port. The second column (b, f, j, n) column shows the intensity images for the beam with the mask in the port. The third column (c, g, k, o) shows the transmission map, T, as defined in Eq. 4. In the final column, the black line shows transmissions through the mask in the T maps where the red line contrasts the noiseless classical intensity cross-section through the same region for the same detection area. The first row (a, b, c, d) has a detection area with a radius of R = 1, the second row (e, f, g, h) has a detection area of R = 5, the third row (i, j, k, l) has a detection area with a radius of R = 10, and the last row (m, n, o, p) has a detection area with a radius of R = 15. The reference and probe maps are on a photon count scale.

more and more pronounced, creating a resolvable "quantum shadow". Such improvement, however, comes with the price of somewhat reduced "sharpness" of the image features. This is because the spatial resolution of the quantum noise maps is inversely proportional to the size of the detection area, while the contrast of the edge is proportional to the detection area. The spatial resolution is also tied to the size of the squeezed mode [13], as seen in Eq. (5), since the size of the detection area needs to correspond to the size of the mode for the best contrast. Thus, in general, a multimode squeezed field with a small mode size is more attractive for imaging applications, compared to a single-mode optical field. Some information about the mode decomposition of our squeezed vacuum field may be gleaned from the first column of images in Fig. 2. If our reference beam was in the single-mode matching the LO, we would expect it to have a normalized variance proportional to the overlap parameter of a fundamental Gaussian spatial mode with itself according to Eq. 5. However, a clear ring-like structure emerges as we increase the detection area, suggesting the presence of weaker higher-order modes. Nevertheless, our close to single-mode squeezer demonstrates quite good visibility of the image.
To quantify the quality of our quantum noise images,

we calculate the similarity defined as

S=

TexpTo ,

(7)

Te2xp To2

where Texp is the experimentally measured transmission, To is the true object transmission, and the sum is taken for pixels along a path across the image (we use horizontal straight line shown in red in Fig. 2d). This metric allows us to quantify how well our noise analysis reconstructs the image of an object. To compare this to the traditional imaging method (see Fig. 1), we did several measurements with a weak coherent field as illuminating source shown in Fig. 3. We can see that the dark noise of the camera dominates over the signal (see top row) and even the beam shape is barely resolvable. As we increase the radius of the detection area, the details of the beam become more visible, but even for the radius of 15 pixels, it is hard to see the mask shape.
We see that the quantum noise images consistently have better similarity (see Fig. 4) and overall reflect the mask shape better for significantly lower photon numbers (we estimate that we have about 1 photon per frame in the squeezed vacuum field). This is because we can boost our quantum noise above the dark noise using a homodyne-like detection scheme and our squeezed pho-

4

Appendix A: Methods

FIG. 4. The similarity of our imaging method as a function of detection radius. Each data set corresponds to a different total photon number (Nph) used to illuminate the image. The black dash-dotted line shows the best similarity possible with our method assuming a perfectly noiseless image. We theoretically calculate Npqhuant = Nsq × texpo/tcoherence, where Nsq = 1 is the number of photons in a squeezed mode with 7.5 dBs of anti-squeezing (assuming a single mode), texpo = 2 × 10-6s is the exposure time of a frame and tcoherence = 2.5 × 10-6s is the coherence time of the squeezing. The similarity was calculated over a 80-pixel span centered around the edge of the mask.
tons have correlations that allow us to reconstruct the image from the noise using less object illuminating resources (photons).
In conclusion, we can image an opaque object by illuminating it with a squeezed vacuum. Our scheme can use anti-squeezed quadrature which makes the whole method more robust against optical and detection losses. We can reconstruct the object by analyzing the quantum noise statistics that change spatially depending on the mode structure of the squeezed vacuum and the object. This has application to any imaging scenario where a high photon number could damage the object, such as biological imaging. Also, the overall scheme is quite simple and outperforms the traditional counterpart even when the allowed number of illuminating photons is larger by a factor of 1000. We also note that this method has the potential to be generalized to other quantum states, e.g. a thermal state since it only depends on the state's deviation from the shot noise. This would, however, require a different form of Eq. 6 that would be derived based on the properties of the state.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the late Jonathan Dowling for his work throughout this project. We also thank Morgan Mitchell for helpful discussions and comments. This research was supported by Grant No. AFOSR FA955019-1-0066

The schematics of the experimental realization of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 5. While the specific method of the squeezed vacuum generation is not important, in the presented experiments we use a squeezer based on the polarization self-rotation in a 87Rb vapor cell [16, 17], details of which are reported at Ref. [18, 19]. The principle difference from the previous experimental arrangement is the pulsed squeezer operation: to avoid camera over-exposure, the pump field is turned on for only 1 µs during the 544 µs duty cycle using an acoustooptical modulator (AOM). Right after the squeezer, we detect 1.5 dB of quantum noise suppression and 10 dB in the anti-squeezed quadrature and these parameters are not affected by the pulsed operation. Due to optical losses in the imaging optics (mainly in the uncoated polarizing beam displacers), after the imaging system, we detect (with homodyning photodiodes) only 0.5 dB squeezing and 7.5 dB anti-squeezing at the imaging end.
After the squeezer, the pump and squeezed vacuum (SqV) fields are physically separated using a polarizing beam displacer (PBD). SqV alone passes through the object and then recombines with an attenuated pump field which now serves as a local oscillator (LO) in the imaging balanced homodyning scheme. We image the object onto the camera using a 4-f system of lenses (see L1 and L2 in Fig. 5).
FIG. 5. Experimental setup with two different detection schemes: traditional homodyne and camera. SqV denotes the squeezed vacuum, LO denotes the local oscillator, PR is phase retarder, AOM is an acousto-optical modulator, and PBD is a polarizing beam displacer. Objects may be placed in the path of the squeezed vacuum where lenses L1 and L2 map the object image onto the camera. PDs are photodiodes, SA is a spectrum analyzer, the camera is connected to a computer. The inset under "Conceptual detection scheme" shows the essence of camera detection.
We obtain quantum-limited statistics from images of the two beams using a Princeton Pixis 1024 camera that has low dark noise counts and high quantum efficiency.

5

This camera can only rapidly capture four frames before having to pause for half a second for data transfer. Thus, we collect four frames, separated by 544µs (synchronized with the pulsed laser) that form "kinetic clusters". To extract the information about the quantum noise variance, we subtract the intensities of the two beams after the final beamsplitter (labeled "1" and "2") to create an amplified noise map - a 2D analog of the differential photo-currents in a traditional homodyne detection scheme. For most measurements, we also need to increase the effective detection area, as discussed below. To do that, for each point x = (x, y) we sum all the counts in the radius R around it to calculate the total photon counts N1(,R2)(x) ­ the process we refer as "binning". Next, we calculate the image of the experimental quantum variance Ve(xRp)(x, y) normalized to the shot noise and temporally-average over a given kinetic cluster:

Ve(xRp)(x) =

N1(R)(x) - N2(R)(x) 2 N1(R)(x) + N2(R)(x)

(A1)

where the average is taken within the four frames of each kinetic cluster. Finally, we average the variance maps over all the kinetic clusters for a given set of experimental parameters to produce an average normalized quantum noise map of our squeezed vacuum.
The need to sum the photo-counts over multiple pixels arises from the necessity to match the size of the detection area to the characteristic quantum-mode size inside the squeezed vacuum beam [13]. Indeed, the situation in which the detection area is much smaller than the mode size of the squeezed vacuum is equivalent to a large optical loss, and thus reduces any non-classical noise down to shot noise. Summing over multiple neighboring pixels is somewhat similar to the increase of the detection area, and thus provides more efficient quantum fluctuation detection. Our measurements show a clear increase in the measured quantum noise variance as the detection area growth, confirming that we have a squeezed mode much larger than the camera pixel size.

Appendix B: Quantum homodyning signal at a pixel
The following analysis is based on the assumption that both squeezed state and local oscillator are initially

within a single spatial mode.
Initial state, |int , is generated from the vacuum by the squeezing operator (S^) in mode 1 and the displacement operator (D^ ) in mode 2. Object to be imaged is
placed in mode 1, and is illuminated solely by squeezed
vacuum. Corresponding state |obj is generated by the action of the object operator (T^) on the initial state.
|bs is the state obtained after mixing squeezed light and the local oscillator on a 50:50 beam splitter (B^).
To calculate variance in the photon number difference
at each pixel, we shift from the Hermite-Gaussian mode
basis to the pixel basis. This basis transformation is implemented by the operators U^1,2(x) to give final state, | .

|int = D^ 2()S^1()|0, 0 |obj = T^1(x)|int |bs = B^12|obj | = U^2(x)U^1(x)|bs ,

(B1) (B2) (B3) (B4)

Calculation of the theoretical variance Vth(x) gives,

Vth(x) =  N^1(x) - N^2(x) 2  =

(B5)

||2 |U2(x)|2 + ||2 (e2r - 1) |U2(x)|2 |U1(x)|2, (B6)

and normalizing it with the intensity of the local oscillator (as outlined in Eq.(A1)) gives normalized variance V (x) as,

Vth(x)

=

Vth(x) ||2 |U2(x)|2

=

1 + (e2r

- 1) |U1(x)|2,

(B7)

where N^1,2 is photon number operator and r is the squeezing parameter.

Appendix C: Quantum variance of a composite detector
Binning procedure entails summing the values of all of the neighbouring pixels inside the detection area (A) of binning radius, R. Normalized variance is calculated after applying binning procedure to beam difference and beam sum matrices. Under the condition that the pixel size is smaller than R and x   with  = {x : |x - x |  R}, it can be written as

Vt(hR)(x) = 

2

N^1(x ) - N^2(x )  =

 N^1(x ) - N^2(x )

x

x x =x

N^2(x ) - N^2(x )

+

 (N^1(x ) - N^2(x ))2  .

x

 (C1)

6 Substituting the result of Eq.(B6) for the second term, followed by expansion of the first term yields

Vt(hR)(x)=
x



2



 ||2 |U2(x )|2 1 + (e2r - 1)|U1(x )|2 +

U2(x )U1(x ) -

|U2(x )U1(x )|2 2 ||2 sinh2(r)

x

x





2



 -

U2(x )U1(x ) - (U2(x )U1(x ))2 2 sinh(r) cosh(r) + c.c.

x

x



(C2)

Furthermore, mode matching condition allows us to write U1(x) = T1(x) · U2(x). This simplifies binned variance as

Vt(hR)(x) = ||2

|U2(x )|2 +

x

2

||2 (e2r - 1)

T1(x ) |U2(x )|2 ,

x
and binned normalized variance as

(C4) (C5)

FIG. 6. The first column (a & b) shows normalized noise maps of a mask in vacuum port calculated with phase matching condition. Binning of images (a) and (b) is done with detection areas of radius R =1 & R=5 (in pixel units), respectively. The second column (c & d) shows normalized noise maps of a mask in vacuum port calculated without phase matching condition. Binning of image (c) and (d) is done with detection areas of radius R =1 & R=5 (in pixel units), respectively.

For the special case of mode matching between squeezed light and local oscillator, camera is placed at the focal point of the lens and object is imaged directly on it. Hence object acts only as an intensity mask and does not add any phase to the transmitted light. Therefore, T1 simplifies to a diagonal matrix comprised of 0s and 1s with the condition:

T^1(x) =

1 - no object 0 - object.

(C3)

Vt(hR)(x) = 1 + (e2r - 1)

x T1(x) |U2(x)|2 2

x |U2(x)|2

.

(C6)

The validity of this approach is tested by calculating the noise map of a map, similar to the second column in Figure 2 in the main text. 128×128 complex-valued map of field amplitudes, generated by classical Fourier optics simulation of a Gaussian beam and a mask in the path of a Gaussian beam is used for U1(x) and U2(x), respectively. Figure 6 shows the normalized noise maps calculated with and without phase-matching conditions for no binning (R=1) and binning (R=5) cases. Normalized variance values greater than unity in the binned image, as opposed to shot noise limited variance obtained without any binning indicates the detection of anti-squeezed light demonstrated in experimental data. Our assumption of phase matching condition is supported by shot noise limited noise maps even after binning in Figure 6(d). The difference in R=1 images obtained by experiments and those by theory can be attributed to the various experimental sources of noise that were not considered in these calculations.

[1] M. Genovese, Real applications of quantum imaging, Journal of Optics 18 (2016).
[2] Y. Shih, Quantum imaging, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 13, 1016 (2007).
[3] I. R. Berchera and I. P. Degiovanni, Quantum imaging with sub-poissonian light: challenges and perspectives in

optical metrology, Metrologia 56, 024001 (2019). [4] C. A. P´erez-Delgado, M. E. Pearce, and P. Kok, Fun-
damental limits of classical and quantum imaging, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 123601 (2012). [5] P. A. Moreau, E. Toninelli, T. Gregory, and et al., Imaging with quantum states of light, Nature 1, 367 (2019).

7

[6] O. Jedrkiewicz, Y.-K. Jiang, E. Brambilla, A. Gatti, M. Bache, L. A. Lugiato, and P. Di Trapani, Detection of sub-shot-noise spatial correlation in high-gain parametric down conversion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 243601 (2004).
[7] G. Brida, L. Caspani, A. Gatti, M. Genovese, A. Meda, and I. R. Berchera, Measurement of sub-shot-noise spatial correlations without background subtraction, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 213602 (2009).
[8] S. Walborn, C. Monken, S. Pa´dua, and P. Souto Ribeiro, Spatial correlations in parametric down-conversion, Physics Reports 495, 87 (2010).
[9] G. Brida, M. Genovese, A. Meda, and I. R. Berchera, Experimental quantum imaging exploiting multimode spatial correlation of twin beams, Phys. Rev. A 83, 033811 (2011).
[10] V. Boyer, A. M. Marino, R. C. Pooser, and P. D. Lett, Entangled images from four-wave mixing, Science 321, 544 (2008).
[11] A. Kumar, H. Nunley, and A. M. Marino, Observation of spatial quantum correlations in the macroscopic regime, Phys. Rev. A 95, 053849 (2017).
[12] M. Edgar, D. Tasca, and F. e. a. Izdebski, Imaging highdimensional spatial entanglement with a camera, Nature 3, 984 (2012).
[13] M. W. Holtfrerich and A. M. Marino, Control of the size of the coherence area in entangled twin beams, Phys. Rev. A 93, 063821 (2016).
[14] A. Kumar and A. M. Marino, Spatial squeezing in bright twin beams generated with four-wave mixing: Constraints on characterization with an electron-multiplying charge-coupled-device camera, Phys. Rev. A 100, 063828 (2019).

[15] A. Kumar, H. Nunley, and A. M. Marino, Comparison of coherence-area measurement techniques for bright entangled twin beams, Phys. Rev. A 98, 043853 (2018).
[16] A. B. Matsko, I. Novikova, G. R. Welch, D. Budker, D. F. Kimball, and S. M. Rochester, Vacuum squeezing in atomic media via self-rotation, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043815 (2002).
[17] E. E. Mikhailov, A. Lezama, T. W. Noel, and I. Novikova, Vacuum squeezing via polarization self-rotation and excess noise in hot Rb vapors, Journal of Modern Optics 56, 1985 (2009), arXiv:0903.3156.
[18] M. Zhang, R. N. Lanning, Z. Xiao, J. P. Dowling, I. Novikova, and E. E. Mikhailov, Spatial multimode structure of atom-generated squeezed light, Phys. Rev. A 93, 013853 (2016).
[19] M. Zhang, M. A. Guidry, R. N. Lanning, Z. Xiao, J. P. Dowling, I. Novikova, and E. E. Mikhailov, Multipass configuration for improved squeezed vacuum generation in hot Rb vapor, Phys. Rev. A 96, 013835 (2017).
[20] M. A. Taylor, J. Janousek, V. Daria, J. Knittel, B. Hage, H.-A. Bachor, and W. P. Bowen, Subdiffraction-limited quantum imaging within a living cell, Phys. Rev. X 4, 011017 (2014).
[21] R. S. Bennink and R. W. Boyd, Improved measurement of multimode squeezed light via an eigenmode approach, Phys. Rev. A 66, 053815 (2002).
[22] E. S. Matekole, S. L. Cuozzo, N. Prajapati, N. Bhusal, H. Lee, I. Novikova, E. E. Mikhailov, J. P. Dowling, and L. Cohen, Quantum-limited squeezed light detection with a camera, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 113602 (2020).

