arXiv:2106.01628v1 [cs.LO] 3 Jun 2021

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES
GURAM BEZHANISHVILI, NICK BEZHANISHVILI, AND JIM DE GROOT
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, USA e-mail address: guram@nmsu.edu
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands e-mail address: n.bezhanishvili@uva.nl
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia e-mail address: jim.degroot@anu.edu.au
Abstract. We develop a uniform coalgebraic approach to Thomason and Jo´nsson-Tarski type dualities for various classes of neighborhood frames and neighborhood algebras. In the first part of the paper we construct an endofunctor on the category of complete and atomic Boolean algebras that is dual to the double powerset functor on Set. This allows us to show that Thomason duality for neighborhood frames can be viewed as an algebra-coalgebra duality. We generalize this approach to any class of algebras for an endofunctor presented by one-step axioms in the language of infinitary modal logic. As a consequence, we obtain a uniform approach to dualities for various classes of neighborhood frames, including monotone neighborhood frames, pretopological spaces, and topological spaces.
In the second part of the paper we develop a coalgebraic approach to J´onsson-Tarski duality for neighborhood algebras and descriptive neighborhood frames. We introduce an analogue of the Vietoris endofunctor on the category of Stone spaces and show that descriptive neighborhood frames are isomorphic to coalgebras for this endofunctor. This allows us to obtain a coalgebraic proof of the duality between descriptive neighborhood frames and neighborhood algebras. Using one-step axioms in the language of finitary modal logic, we restrict this duality to other classes of neighborhood algebras studied in the literature, including monotone modal algebras and contingency algebras.
We conclude the paper by connecting the two types of dualities via canonical extensions, and discuss when these extensions are functorial.

Contents

1. Introduction

2

2. Preliminaries

4

2.1. Duality theory for normal modal logics

4

2.2. Duality theory for non-normal modal logics

5

2.3. The algebra/coalgebra approach

6

3. Thomason type dualities for neighborhood frames

8

3.1. Infinitary languages

9

3.2. One-step axioms

10

Preprint submitted to Logical Methods in Computer Science

© G. Bezhanishvili, N. Bezhanishvili, and J. de Groot CC Creative Commons

2

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

3.3. A functor duality theorem

12

4. Applications

16

4.1. One-step dualities

16

4.2. Restrictions/correspondence results

19

5. J´onsson-Tarski type dualties

21

5.1. Descriptive neighborhood frames

21

5.2. Functor dualities

23

5.3. Forgetting incorrectly

26

6. Canonical extensions

27

6.1. - and -exensions

27

6.2. - and -descriptive frames

30

6.3. When are  and  functors?

31

7. Conclusions

34

References

35

1. Introduction
Dualities between algebraic and relational semantics are an important tool in the study of modal logics. Among these, J´onsson-Tarski and Thomason dualities play a prominent r^ole. J´onsson-Tarski duality establishes that the category of modal algebras is dually equivalent to the category of descriptive Kripke frames, while Thomason duality establishes a dual equivalence between the category of Kripke frames and the category of complete and atomic modal algebras (A, ) such that is completely multiplicative. J´onsson-Tarski duality generalizes Stone duality between Boolean algebras and Stone spaces (compact Hausdorff zero-dimensional spaces), and Thomason duality generalizes Tarski duality between complete and atomic Boolean algebras and sets.
A coalgebraic proof of Jo´nsson-Tarski duality is obtained by lifting Stone duality to an appropriate duality of functors [1, 38]. More precisely, let Stone be the category of Stone spaces and V : Stone  Stone the Vietoris endofunctor on Stone. Then the category DKF of descriptive Kripke frames is isomorphic to the category Coalg(V) of coalgebras for V. In [38] an endofunctor K : BA  BA on the category BA of Boolean algebras is constructed that is dual to V. Consequently, the category Alg(K) of algebras for K is dually equivalent to Coalg(V). Since Alg(K) is isomorphic to the category MA of modal algebras, putting the pieces together yields J´onsson-Tarski duality, stating that MA is dually equivalent to DKF.
Recently a similar approach was undertaken to prove Thomason duality. It is well known that the category KF of Kripke frames is isomorphic to the category Coalg(P) of coalgebras for the covariant powerset endofunctor P on the category Set of sets. In [10] an endofunctor H is constructed on the category CABA of complete and atomic Boolean algebras that is dual to P. Let CAMA be the category of complete and atomic modal algebras (A, ) such that is completely multiplicative. Then CAMA is isomorphic to the category Alg(H) of algebras for H, and we arrive at Thomason duality.
In summary, we have two main dualities for normal modal logic, the "topological" duality of J´onsson and Tarski, and the "discrete" duality of Thomason. There is a tradeoff in the complexity of the structures involved in these dualities. In J´onsson-Tarski duality the

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

3

algebra side of the duality is "simple" (finitary), but the frame side is complex (the relational structures need to be equipped with a Stone topology resulting in descriptive Kripke frames). On the other hand, in Thomason duality the frame side of the duality is simple (Kripke frames), while the algebra side is complex (infinitary).
Jo´nsson-Tarski duality and Thomason duality are related to each other by the following commutative diagram. The diagram on the right is a copy of that on the left, but with the modal algebras and frames presented as algebras and coalgebras for the appropriate functors. The algebraic counterpart of the forgetful functor U : DKF  KF is given by the canonical extension functor  : MA  CAMA making the diagram on the left commute. (We use op to indicate dual equivalence.)

MA op DKF

Alg(K) op Coalg(V)



U

CAMA op KF



U

Alg(H) op Coalg(P)

(1.1)

We encounter a similar situation when looking at non-normal modal logic--an extension of classical propositional logic with a unary modal operator that satisfies only the congruence rule. Its algebras are Boolean algebras with an arbitrary endofunction. We call these neighborhood algebras and write NA for the category of neighborhood algebras and corresponding homomorphisms. The standard geometric semantics of non-normal modal logic is given by neighborhood frames, discovered independently by Scott [47] and Montague [42] (see also [18, 43]). Neighborhood frames can be represented as coalgebras for the double contravariant powerset functor on Set (see, e.g., [57, Example 9.5]). We write NF for the category of neighborhood frames and appropriate morphisms. Dosen [20] generalized both J´onsson-Tarski and Thomason dualities to the setting of neighborhood algebras and frames. The former gives rise to the notion of descriptive neighborhood frames, and the latter yields complete atomic neighborhood algebras. If we write DNF and CANA for the respective categories, then we obtain the following analogue of Diagram (1.1):

NA op DNF

(1.2)

CANA op NF

But the analogy is not perfect: in the non-normal case there are two natural versions of the canonical extension, the - and -extensions, that do not coincide. Moreover, neither is functorial. In fact,  : MA  CAMA is a functor because the - and -extensions coincide in the presence of normality. These two extensions have been investigated in the setting of distributive lattices [27, 28], arbitrary lattices [25], and even posets [29, 26]. In Section 6 we will discuss how to obtain functoriality of - and -extensions in some special cases.
An important subcategory of NA is that of monotone neighborhood frames. For this subcategory, Hansen [34] and Hansen and Kupke [35] developed an alternative approach to Dosen duality. In fact, Hansen's descriptive neighborhood frames are -extensions of Dosen's descriptive neighborhood frames. While Hansen and Kupke mention a coalgebraic approach to Dosen duality, they do not go as far as to prove Dosen duality using the coalgebraic approach discussed above. In Section 6.3 we will see how to obtain such a proof from our approach, which we next outline.

4

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Our main goal is to give a uniform (predominantly coalgebraic) approach to dualities for neighborhood frames. We construct an endofunctor L on the category CABA of complete atomic Boolean algebras (CABAs) that is dual to the double powerset functor. This endofunctor is obtained by modding out the free CABA over a set by the axioms of CANA. The above construction presumes existence of free CABAs. It is well known that free complete Boolean algebras do not exist [24, 32]. However, free CABAs do exist. This follows from the fact that the Eilenberg-Moore algebras of the double contravariant powerset monad are exactly CABAs [54], and that categories of algebras for monads have free objects [2, Proposition 20.7(2)]. A concrete description of free CABAs was given in [10]. We generalize this to any subcategory of CANA axiomatized by one-step axioms in the language of infinitary modal logic. As a consequence, we obtain a uniform approach to duality theory for classes of neighborhood frames, including monotone neighborhood frames, filter frames, and neighborhood contingency frames. Additional correspondence results then give rise to dualities for pretopological spaces, topological spaces, and their various subcategories.
In the second part of the paper we define an analogue of the Vietoris endofunctor on Stone spaces and show that coalgebras for this endofunctor are exactly the descriptive neighborhood frames. This allows us to obtain a coalgebraic proof of the duality between descriptive neighborhood frames and neighborhood algebras. Furthermore, using one-step axioms in the language of finitary modal logic, we restrict this duality to other classes of neighborhood algebras studied in the literature such as normal modal algebras and contingency algebras.
This restriction does not always correspond to known dualities. For example, when restricting neighborhood algebras to monotone Boolean algebra expansions (BAMs) [34, Chapter 7] we do not obtain the duality for monotone modal logic of Hansen and Kupke [35]. In fact, the neighborhood frames underlying the descriptive frames in the duality obtained from our general theory need not be monotone. The descriptive frames used by Hansen and Kupke can be obtained from ours through the theory of canonical extensions. In Section 6 we provide an axiom which guarantees that this construction is functorial. We use this to give an alternative coalgebraic proof of the duality for BAMs in [35].
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Duality theory for normal modal logics. Classical modal logic is an extension of classical propositional logic with an additional unary modality . The modality is called normal if it distributes over finite meets. By the standard interpretation in a Kripke frame (X, R), a state x in X satisfies  if all its R-successors satisfy . Clearly a state then satisfies    iff it satisfies (  ). To interpret a non-normal we need to generalize Kripke semantics to the so-called neighborhood semantics.
Definition 2.1 ([18, 43]). A neighborhood frame is a pair (X, N ) consisting of a set X and a neighborhood function N : X  PPX, where PX is the powerset of X.
For x  X, we call elements of N (x) the neighborhoods of x. A state x in X then satisfies  if the set  := {y  X | y } is a neighborhood of x.
Kripke frames can be thought of as special neighborhood frames. Indeed, if we identify a Kripke frame (X, R) with the neighborhood frame (X, NR), where NR(x) = {b  X |

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

5

R[x]  b}, then the interpretation of  in (X, R) and (X, NR) coincides. (As usual, R[x] := {y  X | xRy} denotes the set of R-successors of x.)
The algebraic semantics of normal modal logic is given by modal algebras. These are Boolean algebras endowed with a unary function : B  B that preserves finite meets. Together with -preserving Boolean homomorphisms they form the category MA.
Every Kripke frame (X, R) gives rise to the modal algebra (PX, R) where Ra := {x  X | R[x]  a}. By the Jo´nsson-Tarski representation theorem [37], each modal algebra (B, ) can be represented as a subalgebra of the modal algebra (PX, R), where X is the set of ultrafilters of B and R is defined on X by xRy iff a  x implies a  y for each a  B. In fact, one can endow X with a topology  such that the Boolean algebra of clopen subsets of (X,  ) is isomorphic to B.
This gives rise to the notion of a descriptive Kripke frame, that is, a Kripke frame (X, R) where X is a Stone space (a compact Hausdorff zero-dimensional space) and R is a continuous relation on X; see also [57]. Let KF be the category of Kripke frames and bounded morphisms and DKF the category of descriptive Kripke frames and continuous bounded morphisms. We then have the duality for modal algebras and descriptive frames in Theorem 2.2 below. The duality on objects traces back to the 1951 paper by J´onsson and Tarski [37] and was subsequently extended to the categorical duality as we know it now [33, 21, 31].
Theorem 2.2 (J´onsson-Tarski duality). MA is dually equivalent to DKF.
This theorem generalizes Stone duality [50] between the category BA of Boolean algebras and Boolean homomorphisms and the category Stone of Stone spaces and continuous functions. To obtain a similar duality for KF we recall Tarski duality for complete and atomic Boolean algebras. Let CABA be the category of complete and atomic Boolean algebras and complete Boolean homomorphisms, and let Set be the category of sets and functions. Observe that CABA is a non-full subcategory of BA. Then Tarski duality states that CABA is dually equivalent to Set. On objects, this duality stems from Tarski's 1935 paper [52] and a statement of the full duality can be found in [36, Example 4.6(a)]. The name "Tarski duality" was coined recently in [13]. The duality is obtained by sending a set X to its powerset, conceived of as a CABA, and a CABA B to its set of atoms. On morphisms, a function f : X  X is sent to its inverse image, and a complete Boolean homomorphism h : A  A to the restriction of its left adjoint to the atoms. Thus, we obtain the contravariant functors  : Set  CABA and at : CABA  Set which yield Tarski duality.
Thomason [55] generalized Tarski duality to the category CAMA, whose objects are modal algebras (B, ) such that B is a CABA and is completely multiplicative, i.e., preserves all meets. The morphisms of CAMA are complete modal algebra homomorphisms.
Theorem 2.3 (Thomason duality). CAMA is dually equivalent to KF.
2.2. Duality theory for non-normal modal logics. The algebraic semantics of nonnormal classical modal logic is given by pairs (B, ) where B is a Boolean algebra and
: B  B is an arbitrary (not necessarily meet-preserving) function. Dosen [20] calls these "modal algebras," but to avoid confusion we will call them neighborhood algebras. We write NA for the category of neighborhood algebras and -preserving Boolean homomorphisms. In addition, we write NF for the category of neighborhood frames and neighborhood morphisms,

6

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

where we recall (see, e.g., [43, Definition 2.9]) that a neighborhood morphism from (X, N ) to (X , N ) is a function f : X  X such that

a  N (f (x)) iff f -1(a )  N (x)

(2.1)

for all x  X and a  X . Dosen [20] generalized J´onsson-Tarski duality and Thomason duality to the setting of
neighborhood algebras and frames. The r^ole of descriptive Kripke frames is now played by descriptive neighborhood frames (defined in detail in Section 5.1). Together with continuous neighborhood morphisms they comprise the category DNF. Likewise, CAMAs are replaced by complete atomic neighborhood algebras (CANAs), i.e., neighborhood algebras (A, ) such that A is complete and atomic. We write CANA for the category of CANAs and complete neighborhood algebra homomorphisms.

Theorem 2.4 (Dosen [20]). (1) NA is dually equivalent to DNF. (2) CANA is dually equivalent to NF.

2.3. The algebra/coalgebra approach. Recall [2, Definition 5.37] that an algebra for an endofunctor L on a category A is a pair (A, ) consisting of an object A  A and a morphism  : LA  A in A. An L-algebra morphism from (A, ) to (A ,  ) is an A-morphism h : A  A such that the following diagram commutes in A:

LA Lh LA





AhA

We write Alg(L) for the category of L-algebras and L-algebra morphisms.

Example 2.5. (1) It is well known that MA is isomorphic to the category Alg(K) for the endofunctor K : BA  BA that sends a Boolean algebra B to the free Boolean algebra generated by the meet-semilattice underlying B ([1], [30, Section 2], [38, Proposition 3.17]). (2) As we pointed out in the introduction, free CABAs exist because CABAs are exactly the Eilenberg-Moore algebras of the double contravariant powerset monad [54] (see also [14, Section 5.1]), and categories of Eilenberg-Moore algebras have free objects [2, Proposition 20.7(2)]. In [10] a concrete construction of free CABAs was given and it was shown that CAMA is isomorphic to Alg(H) for the endofunctor H : CABA  CABA that sends a CABA B to the free CABA generated by the complete meet-semilattice underlying B.

By an easy adaptation of the proof of [57] and [10], respectively, one can show that:

Proposition 2.6.

(1) Let N : BA  BA be the composition of the forgetful functor BA  Set and the free

functor Set  BA. Then

NA = Alg(N ).

(2) Let L : CABA  CABA be the composition of the forgetful functor CABA  Set and

the free functor Set  CABA. Then

CANA = Alg(L).

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

7

Proof. If B is a Boolean algebra, then N B is the free Boolean algebra generated by the set { b | b  B}. So a homomorphism N B  B is uniquely determined by its action on elements of the form b. Now given a neighborhood algebra (B, ), define an N -algebra structure  : N B  B via  ( b) = b. Conversely, an N -algebra  : N B  B gives rise to the neighborhood algebra (B, ) where b = ( b). It is easy to verify that these assignments prove the isomorphism of the first item on objects. The verification on morphisms is a routine exercise. The second item can be proven analogously.

The dual notion of an algebra is that of a coalgebra. A coalgebra for a functor T : C  C is a pair (X, ) such that  : X  T X is a morphism in C. A T -coalgebra morphism from (X, ) to (X ,  ) is a C-morphism f : X  X such that the following diagram commutes in C:
XfX





TX Tf TX

We write Coalg(T ) for the category of T -coalgebras and T -coalgebra morphisms.

P

PP

PP

Example 2.7.
(1) Let P : Set  Set be the covariant powerset functor on Set. It is well known (see,
e.g., [45, Example 2.1]) that KF is isomorphic to Coalg(P). (2) Let : Set  Set be the contravariant powerset functor on Set.1 Then NF is
isomorphic to Coalg( ) [57, Example 9.5]. We abbreviate B := , so NF = Coalg(B).
(3) Let V : Stone  Stone be the Vietoris endofunctor on Stone. We recall (see e.g. [38,
Definition 2.5]) that the Vietoris space VX of a Stone space X is the set of closed subsets of X whose topology is generated by the (clopen) subbasis

a = {c  VX | c  a},

a = {c  VX | c  a = },

where a ranges over the clopen subsets of X. (Note that a = VX \ (X \ a), so the topology can alternatively be defined by taking the Boolean closure of { a | a  clpX} as a basis.) It is well known that VX is a Stone space, and that the assignment V extends to an endofunctor on Stone by setting Vf : VX  VX : c  f [c] for a continuous function f : X  X . It is well known that DKF is isomorphic to Coalg(V); see, e.g., [21, 1, 38]. (4) In Section 5.1 we will define a neighborhood analogue D of the Vietoris endofunctor such that the category DNF of descriptive neighborhood frames is isomorphic to Coalg(D).

Since MA is isomorphic to Alg(K) and DKF is isomorphic to Coalg(V), a convenient way to obtain Jo´nsson-Tarski duality is to prove that Stone duality between BA and Stone lifts to a dual equivalence between Alg(K) and Coalg(V). This can be done by lifting Stone duality to a duality of functors.

1Note that : Set  Set is the composition of  : Set  CABA with the forgetful functor CABA  Set.

P

8

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Definition 2.8. We call functors L : BA  BA and T : Stone  Stone Stone-duals if the diagram below commutes up to natural isomorphism.

uf

BA

Stone

clp

L

T

uf

BA

Stone

clp

Here uf and clp are the contravariant functors that establish Stone duality. That is, uf
denotes the functor that sends a Boolean algebra to its Stone space of ultrafilters and a homomorphism h to h-1. In the other direction, clp is the functor that sends a Stone space to its Boolean algebra of clopen sets and a continuous function f to f -1.

Since algebra and coalgebra are dual concepts, we then obtain Alg(L) op Coalg(T ).
Thus, J´onsson-Tarski duality follows from the fact that K and V are Stone-duals [38]. Similarly, since CAMA is isomorphic to Alg(H) and KF is isomorphic to Coalg(P), we
can obtain Thomason duality by lifting Tarski duality between CABA and Set to a dual equivalence between Alg(H) and Coalg(P).

Definition 2.9. We call L : CABA  CABA and T : Set  Set Tarski-duals if the diagram below commutes up to natural isomorphism.

CABA at Set


L

T

at

CABA

Set



As with Stone-dual functors, this gives rise to a duality Alg(L) op Coalg(T ).

Thomason duality can now be obtained from the fact that H and P are Tarski-duals, which is proven in [10, Theorem 5.3].

3. Thomason type dualities for neighborhood frames
In this section we derive Thomason type dualities for classes of neighborhood frames. We focus on classes of CANAs and classes of neighborhood frames that are described by the so-called one-step axioms. As we will see, the corresponding dualities are then obtained as algebra/coalgebra dualities. Indeed, classes of CANAs defined by one-step axioms can be viewed as categories of algebras for some endofunctor on CABA, while the corresponding classes of neighborhood frames as categories of coalgebras for an endofunctor on Set. We can then obtain the desired duality as a duality of functors (see Definition 2.9).
Our results generalize those in [10], where a functor duality is proved between the endofunctor H on CABA whose algebras are CAMAs (Example 2.5(2)) and the powerset functor P : Set  Set (Example 2.7(1)). In Example 3.23 we detail how the results of [10] fit in our general scheme. The algebra/coalgebra dualities we obtain pave the way for investigations of the resulting classes of frames using methods of coalgebraic logic, such as developed in e.g. [57, 39].

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

9

As running examples, we derive Thomason duality for Kripke frames [55] and Dosen duality for neighborhood frames [20, Theorem 12]. Section 4 is dedicated to deriving new dualities for various classes of neighborhood frames using the theory from this section.
3.1. Infinitary languages. We will work in a modal language with arbitrary conjunctions. For each cardinal , let V be a set of variables of cardinality  and define L to be the set of formulae generated by the grammar
 ::= v | | ¬ | iI i where v  V and I is some index set of cardinality < . We then define L as the proper class that contains the formulae in L for all cardinals .
The study of propositional and first-order languages with infinite conjunctions was pioneered by Scott and Tarski [48] and Tarski [53]. In both these references the size of conjunctions (and quantifiers) is bounded by some cardinal. First-order logics that allow conjunctions and disjunctions over arbitrary sets of formulae have been studied comprehensively; see, e.g., [17], [6, Part C], [7], and the references therein.
We next extend the grammar of L(V ) with a modal operator.
Definition 3.1. For each cardinal , let V be a set of variables of cardinality  and define L as the set of formulae generated by the grammar
 ::= v | | ¬ | i | 
iI
where v  V and I is an index set of cardinality < . We then define L as the proper class that contains the formulae in L for all cardinals . We will think of elements of L as axioms.
Note that L is the -free fragment of L .
Definition 3.2. Let (A, ) be a CANA. An assignment for (A, ) is a family  : V  A, where  ranges over the cardinals. Every assignment  : V  A can be extended in an obvious way to a map
 : L  A. An assignment gives rise to a map  : L  A that sends   L to ()  A.
(1) If   L , then we say that (A, ) validates  and write (A, )  if () = 1 for every assignment  : (V)Card  A.
(2) If Ax  L is a class of axioms, then we say that (A, ) validates Ax and write (A, ) Ax if (A, )  for all   Ax.
Definition 3.3. If Ax is a class of axioms, then we write CANA(Ax) for the full subcategory of CANA whose objects validate Ax.

10

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

3.2. One-step axioms. We next concentrate on the so-called one-step axioms. Intuitively, these are formulae in L such that every variable occurs in the scope of precisely one box. We will see that, in case Ax consists solely of one-step axioms, the category CANA(Ax) is isomorphic to Alg(LAx) for some endofunctor LAx on CABA.
Definition 3.4. For each cardinal , let V be a set of variables of cardinality  and define (L )1 as the set of formulae generated by the grammar
 ::=  | | ¬ | iI i where   L(V) and I is some index set of cardinality < . We then define (L )1 as the proper class that contains the formulae in (L )1 for all cardinals . A one-step axiom is a formula   (L )1.
Remark 3.5. When viewed as formulae in the modal language L , the formulae in (L )1 are sometimes referred to as "formulae of modal depth 1" or "rank 1 formulae." This justifies our notation. Observe that every one-step axiom is in particular an axiom in the sense of Section 3.1.
Example 3.6. (1) Using standard abbreviations , , , and , examples of one-step axioms are v  (v  u), v  u  (v  u), and

v 

v ,

<

<

where v, u, v  V and ,  are cardinals. (2) On the other hand, the axioms v  v, v 

one-step axioms.

v, and

vv 

v are not

The appeal of one-step axioms lies in the fact that they define endofunctors on CABA in a structured way. All of these are subfunctors of L : CABA  CABA from Proposition 2.6(2). If  is a one-step axiom and  : (V)Card  A is an assignment, then  gives rise to a map  : (L )1  LA. Note that this does not rely on any CANA-structure on A. Indeed, we can use the fact that  is of modal depth 1 and define  as follows.
Definition 3.7. For a CABA A and assignment  : (V)Card  A we define  : (L )1  LA recursively via
() = (),
for   L (which is well defined because  does not contain any boxes), and
( ) = 1
(¬) = ¬()

 i = (i)

iI

iI

Intuitively, the endofunctor on CABA corresponding to a collection Ax of one-step axioms sends A  CABA to the free complete atomic Boolean algebra generated by A modulo (instantiations of) the axioms, i.e., modulo the relations () = 1, where   Ax and  is an assignment for A. Before defining this functor, we recall the notion of a complete congruence on a CABA.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

11

Definition 3.8. A complete congruence on a CABA A is an equivalence relation  on the underlying set such that a  b implies ¬a  ¬b, and ai  bi for all i in some index set I implies iI ai  iI bi.
If  is a complete congruence on A, then we can define the quotient CABA A/. Writing [a] for the equivalence class of a, the CABA-operations on A/ are defined by 1 = [1A], ¬[a] = [¬a], and [ai] = [ ai]. Furthermore, the quotient map q : A  A/ : a  [a] is a complete homomorphism.
The collection of complete congruences on a CABA is closed under arbitrary intersections. Therefore, if we have a collection R of equations on A (that is, a collection of equations of the form a = b, where a, b  A), then we can define the complete congruence generated by R to be the smallest complete congruence R that contains a R b for all equations a = b in R. Consequently, A/R is the largest quotient (= complete homomorphic image) of A in which all equations in R hold.
We are now ready to define an endofunctor LAx on CABA from a collection Ax of one-step axioms.
Definition 3.9. Let Ax be a collection of one-step axioms. For A  CABA, define LAxA to be the free complete atomic Boolean algebra generated by the set { a | a  A} modulo the congruence Ax generated by {() Ax 1}, where  ranges over the axioms in Ax and  ranges over the assignments (V)Card  A for the variables in . For a complete homomorphism h : A  A define LAxh on generators by
LAxh( a) = h(a).
If Ax consists of a single axiom ax, then we write L(ax) instead of L{(ax)}. Many wellknown functors in modal logic can be obtained via Definition 3.9. We give two examples.
Example 3.10. If we work with no axioms (i.e., Ax = ), then the functor that arises from Definition 3.9 is precisely the functor L from Proposition 2.6(2).
In our next example we recover the endofunctor H : CABA  CABA from [10, Section 4], where H sends a CABA A to the free CABA generated by the complete meet-semilattice underlying A (see Example 2.5(2)).
Intuitively, the CABA HA is the free CABA generated by the set { a | a  A} modulo bX b = X for every X  A. Although this looks like the instantiation of a single one-step axiom, it is not. Indeed, if we define

=

v

V

vV

then the axiom  only implies -distributivity. To remedy this, we work with a class of

axioms indexed by the class Card of cardinal numbers. For each   Card, define

(C) { v | v  V}  V.

Now set

C = {(C) |   Card}.

Example 3.11. Consider the collection of axioms Ax = C. Then the construction of Definition 3.9 yields the functor H from [10]. Its algebras correspond to complete atomic modal algebras.

12

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Thus, incidentally, the previous example also illustrates the need to allow a proper class of axioms, rather than just a set.
Every LAx-algebra (A, ) gives rise to a complete atomic algebra (A, ), where
 : A  A : a  ( a).
Furthermore, if   Ax, then since () Ax for all assignments  : (V)Card  A, we have (A, ) . Conversely, if (A, ) is a CANA and (A, ) Ax, then we can define an LAx-algebra structure map  : LAxA  A on generators by  ( a) = a. The fact that (A, ) Ax implies that  is well defined.
It is easy to see that the two assignments above define a bijection between objects of Alg(LAx) and objects of CANA(Ax). We can extend this to a natural isomorphism in a standard way.

Theorem 3.12. If Ax is a collection of one-step axioms, then Alg(LAx) = CANA(Ax).

Proof sketch. The isomorphism on objects has already been sketched. To prove the isomorphism on morphisms, let (A, ) and (A ,  ) be two LAx-algebras with corresponding CANAs (A, ) and (A , ). We claim that a complete homomorphism h : A  A is an LAx-algebra morphism from (A, ) to (A ,  ) iff it is a CANA-morphism from (A, ) to (A , ).
Note that h is an LAx-algebra morphism iff

h(( a)) =  (LAxh( a)) for all a  A. Since ( a) = a and  (LAxh( a)) =  ( h(a)) = h(a), (3.1) holds iff

(3.1)

h( a) = (h(a)) for all a  A.

In other words, (3.1) holds iff h is a CANA-morphism.

Going back to the class of axioms C from Example 3.11, we see that Theorem 3.12 generalizes [10, Theorem 4.4]:
Example 3.13. Suppose Ax = C. Then LAx = H and CANA(Ax) = CAMA, so that Alg(H) = CAMA.

3.3. A functor duality theorem. We now classify the atoms of LAxA as subsets of A. This then gives rise to an endofunctor on Set which is a subfunctor of B of Example 2.7(2) and is dual to LAx. We make use of the following notation to characterize the subsets of A we are interested in.
Definition 3.14. Let A be a set and a  A. Define
a = {W  A | a  W }.
We can assign to each one-step formula a subset of PA.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

13

Definition 3.15. Let  be a one-step axiom, A a set and  : V  A an assignment of the variables in . Define t[] to be the subset of PA given recursively by:
( v)t[] = (v) t[] = PA
(¬)t[] = PA \ t[] ( i)t[] = {ti[]} It then follows that: ( i)t[] = {ti[]} (  )t[] = {W  A | W  t[]  W  t[]} (  )t[] = {W  A | W  t[]  W  t[]}
We say that W is a -subset of A if W  t[] for every assignment  of the variables in V . If Ax is a collection of axioms, then we say that W is an Ax-subset if W is a -subset for all   Ax.

The next lemma witnesses the significance of Ax-subsets by proving a bijective correspondence between atoms of LAxA and Ax-subsets of A. Recall that atoms of a CABA A correspond bijectively to complete homomorphisms into the two-element Boolean algebra 2: If a  A is an atom, then pa : A  2, given by pa(b) = 1 iff a  b, defines a complete homomorphism. Conversely, every complete homomorphism p arises in this way, where a = {b  A | p(b) = 1}.

Lemma 3.16. Let A  CABA and let Ax be a collection of axioms. Then the atoms of LAxA correspond bijectively to Ax-subsets of A.

Proof. We view atoms of LAxA as complete homomorphisms p : LAxA  2. Since LAxA is defined by generators and relations, p is uniquely determined by its action on the generators of LAxA, i.e., the elements of the form b with b  A. Let Wp  A be the set

Wp = {b  A | p( b) = 1}.

(3.2)

Conversely, given a subset W  A, we define pW : LAxA  2 on generators by pW ( b) = 1 iff b  W .
In order to prove that these assignments are well defined, we use the fact that complete
homomorphisms p : LAxA  2 correspond to complete homomorphisms p : LA  2 whose kernel contains the complete congruence Ax generated by (instantiations of) the axioms in Ax (see Definition 3.9). Therefore, for W  A, we let pW : LA  2 be the complete homomorphism defined by pW ( b) = 1 iff b  W .

Claim 3.17. Let p : LA  2 be a complete homomorphism. Then for all one-step formulae  and assignments  : (V)Card  A we have
p(()) = 1 iff Wp  t[].

14

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Proof of claim. We proceed by induction on the complexity of . If  = v, where v is in one of the V, then we have
p(( v)) = 1 iff p( (v)) = 1
iff (v)  Wp iff Wp  ((v)) iff Wp  ( v)t[].
Let  = . By definition, p(()) = 1 for all complete homomorphisms p. Since t() = PA, the result holds for  = . For negation, we have

p((¬)) = 1 iff p(¬()) = 1

iff p(()) = 0 iff Wp / t[] iff Wp  PA \ t[] = (¬)t[]. Finally, if  = i then p(( i)) = 1 iff p( (i)) = 1
iff p((i)) = 1 iff Wp  ti[] for all i iff Wp  ti[] = ( i)t[]. This completes the proof of the claim.

(inductive hypothesis) (inductive hypothesis)

Now let p : LAxA  2 be a complete homomorphism. Then composing the quotient map q : LA  LAxA with p yields a complete homomorphism

p  q : LA  2

(3.3)

whose kernel contains Ax. Moreover, Wp = Wpq, where Wpq is defined as in (3.2) for the complete homomorphism from (3.3), because q sends the generator a of LA to the equivalence class of a in LAxA. Consequently,
Wp  t[] iff Wpq  t[] iff (p  q)(()) = 1 iff p(()) = 1.
Since  Ax 1 for all   Ax, we have p(()) = 1 for all   Ax. Using the claim, this proves that Wp is an Ax-subset.
Conversely, a similar computation shows that whenever W is an Ax-subset, then the kernel of pW : LA  2 contains Ax, and hence pW defines a complete homomorphism pW : LAxA  2. In addition, for each b  A we have pWp( b) = 1 iff b  Wp iff p( b) = 1, so pWp = p. Similarly, b  WpW iff pW ( b) = 1 iff b  W , and hence WpW = W . Thus, these assignments define a bijection.

Guided by Lemma 3.16, we define an endofunctor on Set which we then prove to be the Tarski-dual of LAx.

Definition 3.18. Let X be a set and Ax a collection of one-step axioms. Define BAxX to be the set of Ax-subsets of PX. For a function f : X  X in Set, define BAxf by
BAxf : BAxX  BAxX : W  {a  PX | f -1(a )  W }.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

15

If Ax consists of a single axiom ax, then we write B(ax) instead of B{(ax)}.
Proposition 3.19. The assignment BAx is a well-defined endofunctor on Set.
Proof. Clearly BAxX is a set for every set X. Let f : X  X be a function and let W  BAxX. We need to show that BAxf (W ) is in BAxX , that is, BAxf (W ) is an Ax-subset of PX . But this follows from the fact that BAxf (W )  a iff W  f -1(a ).
Functoriality of BAx follows from the fact that BAx is a subfunctor of B.
We are ready to prove the main result of this section.
Theorem 3.20 (Tarski Functor Duality Theorem). The functors LAx and BAx are Tarskiduals.
Proof. Define X : at(LAx(X))  BAxX by p  Wp. This defines an isomorphism on objects by Lemma 3.16. We prove that the assignment  = (X )XSet : at  LAx    BAx is natural by showing that for every function f : X  X the diagram
at (LAx(X)) X BAxX

at (LAx(f ))

BAx f

at (LAx(X )) X BAxX

commutes. To this end, let u  at(LAx(X)) and let p : LAx(X)  2 be the corresponding complete homomorphism Furthermore, let a  X . Then
a  BAxf  X (p) iff X (p)(f -1(a )) = 1 iff p( f -1(a )) = 1

This proves the theorem.

iff p(LAx(f )( a )) = 1 iff at(LAx(f ))(p)( a ) = 1 iff a  X  at(LAx(f ))(p).

Corollary 3.21. For every set Ax of one-step axioms, we have Alg(LAx) op Coalg(BAx).

Example 3.22. As the notation suggests, the functor B defined as in Definition 3.18 using the empty set of axioms is precisely the functor B from Example 2.7(2). We have seen that its coalgebras are neighborhood frames. Combining this with Example 3.10 and Theorem 3.20 yields that N and B are Tarski-duals. As a consequence of Corollary 3.21, we derive Dosen's duality [20] for neighborhood frames via
CANA = Alg(N ) op Coalg(B) = NF.

Example 3.23. Let Ax = C as in Example 3.13. For a set X, the set BAxX consists of all collections of neighborhoods that are upward closed under inclusion and closed under arbitrary intersections. Such a collection is uniquely determined by its smallest neighborhood, and a straightforward verification shows that BAx is naturally isomorphic to the covariant powerset functor P : Set  Set.

16

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

As a consequence of Theorem 3.20, we obtain that P is dual to H, a result that was

recently established in [10, Theorem 5.3]. Using the well-known fact that P-coalgebras are

Kripke frames and the observation that H-algebras are CAMAs, we arrive at Thomason

duality:

CAMA = Alg(H) op Coalg(P) = KF.

4. Applications
In this section we first derive dualities for various types of neighborhood frames using only one-step axioms and Corollary 3.21. This gives rise to Thomason type dualities for monotone neighborhood frames, contingency neighborhood frames, and filter frames. Each of these is an algebra/coalgebra duality.
Next we show how some of these restrict when we invoke further axioms, which are not necessarily one-step axioms. These results can be seen as correspondence results. Most notably, they allow us to obtain McKinsey-Tarski duality for topological spaces (with interior maps) as an easy restriction of the duality for filter frames. An overview of the dual equivalences discussed in this section is given in Table 1.

4.1. One-step dualities.
4.1.1. Monotone neighborhood frames. Monotone modal logic is a well-studied branch of modal logic (see, e.g., [18, 34, 35]). The standard semantics for monotone modal logic is given by monotone neighborhood frames. Recall that these are neighborhood frames (X, N ) such that N (x) is upward closed under inclusion as a subset of PX. We write MF for the full subcategory of NF whose objects are monotone neighborhood frames. It is well known that MF = Coalg(UpP), where UpP : Set  Set takes a set X to the collection of subsets of PX that are upward closed under inclusion [34, 35].
The algebraic semantics of monotone modal logic is given by monotone Boolean algebra expansions (BAMs for short) [34, Section 7]. A BAM is a neighborhood algebra (A, ) such that : A  A is a monotone function (that is, a  b implies a  b). Let BAM be the full subcategory of NA whose objects are BAMs.
Definition 4.1. Let CABAM be the full subcategory of CANA whose objects are also BAMs.
We can view CABAM as a category of algebras for an endofunctor on CABA. To see this, consider the one-step axiom
(M) (u  v)  u
expressing monotonicity. As a consequence of Theorem 3.12, we have:
Corollary 4.2. CABAM = Alg(L(M)).
For a set X, the (M)-subsets of PX are precisely the ones that are up-closed under inclusion. It then follows immediately from the definitions that B(M) defined as in Definition 3.18 coincides with UpP : Set  Set from [35, Section 3.1]. As a consequence of Corollary 3.21, we obtain:

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

17

Axioms Algebras Objects Frames

Location

None

CANA NF

Complete atomic neighborhood algebras Neighborhood frames

Example 3.22

(Cont) CAContA Complete atomic contingency algebras ContF Contingency frames

Section 4.1.2

(Conv) CACA CNF

Complete atomic convex algebras Convex neighborhood frames

Section 4.1.3

(M)

CABAM Complete atomic monotone BA expansions Section 4.1.1

MF

Monotone neighborhood frames

(N), (C) caMA FF

Modal algebras over CABAs Filter frames

Section 4.1.4

(C)

-additive complete atomic modal algebras Remark 4.7

-complete neighborhood frames

C

CAMA Complete atomic modal algebras

KF

Kripke frames

Example 3.23

(N), (C), PreTopint Pretopological spaces

(T)

PreInt Complete atomic pre-interior algebras

Section 4.2

(N), (C), Topint (T), (4) Int

Topological spaces Complete atomic interior algebras

Section 4.2

Table 1: Overview of pairs of dual categories.

Theorem 4.3. The category MF of monotone neighborhood frames is dually equivalent to CABAM.
Proof. As a consequence of Theorem 3.20, the functors L(M) and B(M) = UpP are dual. Moreover, CABAM = Alg(L(M)) by Corollary 4.2, and MF = Coalg(UpP) by [35, Lemma 3.4]. Therefore, Corollary 3.21 implies that Alg(L(M)) op Coalg(UpP), which proves the theorem.

4.1.2. Duality for neighborhood contingency logic. A formula is called contingent if it is possibly true and possibly false. Otherwise it is non-contingent, i.e., it is necessarily true or necessarily false. Neighborhood contingency logic was recently introduced in [23] to reason about contingent formulae, and is investigated further in [3, 22]. The non-contingency modality is interpreted in a neighborhood frame (X, N ) by
x  iff   N (x) or X \   N (x),
As a consequence of this definition, the interpretation of formulae does not distinguish whether a  N (x) or X \ a  N (x) or both. Therefore, it suffices to only consider the neighborhood frames (X, N ) that satisfy: for all x  X and a  X,
a  N (x) iff X \ a  N (x).

18

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

We call such frames contingency frames and write ContF for the full category of NF consisting of contingency frames. Then ContF is isomorphic to the category of B(Cont)-coalgebras, where (Cont) is the axiom
(Cont) v  ¬v.
Corollary 3.21 implies that Coalg(B(Cont)) op Alg(L(Cont)). As a consequence of Theorem 3.12 we can describe the latter category of algebras explicitly as the full subcategory of CANA whose objects are the CANAs (A, ) satisfying a = ¬a for all a  A. We call these complete atomic contingence algebras and denote the category they form by CAContA. Thus, putting the above together, we obtain:
Theorem 4.4. ContF op CAContA.

4.1.3. Convex frames. Our next example concerns convex neighborhood frames. These are neighborhood frames (X, N ) such that N (x) is a convex subset of PX, meaning that for all x  X, if a, a  N (x) and a  b  a , then b  N (x). Write CNF for the full subcategory of NF whose objects are convex neighborhood frames.
As we will see in Section 6, convexity is closely related to the question of functoriality of canonical extensions of neighborhood frames. Convexity is captured by the following axiom:
(Conv) (v  v )  (v  v )  v
Therefore, CNF = Coalg(B{(Conv)}). We call the corresponding algebras complete atomic convex algebras, and denote by CACA the full subcategory of CANA whose objects are complete atomic convex algebras. Then CACA = Alg(L{(Conv)}), and as a consequence of Corollary 3.21, we obtain:
Theorem 4.5. CNF op CACA.

4.1.4. Filter frames. Finally, we consider filter frames [18, Section 7.2]. These are of interest because they are as close as we can get to topological spaces using only one-step axioms (see below). Recall that a filter on a set X is a subset F  PX that is closed under finite intersections and upward closed under inclusion. In particular, this implies that X  F as X is the empty intersection of subsets of X. A filter frame is a neighborhood frame (X, N ) such that N (x) is a filter on X for each x  X. Let FF be the full subcategory of NF consisting of filter frames.
From the coalgebraic point of view, filter frames are BAx-coalgebras, where Ax consists of the axioms

(N) (C) u  v  (u  v)

We write B for B{(N),(C)}. We then have FF = Coalg(B). As a consequence of Corollary 3.21, we obtain the dual equivalence

Coalg(B) op Alg(L),

(4.1)

where L abbreviates L{(N),(C)}.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

19

Since (N) and (C) are the axioms that on the algebra side define modal algebras, Lalgebras are simply modal algebras whose underlying Boolean algebra is complete and atomic. We write caMA for the full subcategory of CANA whose objects are modal algebras based on complete atomic Boolean algebras. By contrast, recall that CAMA denotes the full subcategory of CANA whose objects (A, ) are such that A is complete and atomic and preserves arbitrary meets. Therefore, CAMA is a full subcategory of caMA. Rephrasing (4.1) yields the following generalization of Thomason duality:
Theorem 4.6. FF op caMA.
Remark 4.7. If we require the collection of neighborhoods at each state to be closed under intersections of size < , where  is some fixed cardinal, then we obtain the -complete neighborhood frames from [51, Section 4]. This corresponds to the axiom (C), and yields a dual equivalence with -additive complete atomic modal algebras. This category lies in between CAMA and caMA.
4.2. Restrictions/correspondence results. If a collection of frames or algebras is not given by one-step axioms, we can still derive dualities for them from correspondence results for the axioms under consideration, but they are no longer algebra/coalgebra dualities. This allows us to derive other interesting dualities, such as McKinsey-Tarski duality for topological spaces (and interior maps).
Topological spaces are obtained from filter frames by stipulating the reflexivity and transitivity axioms (T) and (4). Adding only (T) results in the more general notion of pre-topological spaces. For a neighborhood frame (X, N ) and a  X, let
N (a) = {y  X | a  N (y)}.
Definition 4.8. (1) A pre-topological space is a filter frame that satisfies
(Cent) a  N (x) implies x  a.
(2) A topological space is a pre-topological space that satisfies
(iv) a  N (x) implies N (a)  N (x).
Remark 4.9. (1) The above definition of topological spaces in the language of neighborhood bases is well known (see, e.g., [58, Theorem 4.5]). (2) The above definition of pre-topological spaces can for example be found in [49, Appendix A]. (3) Neighborhood frames satisfying (Cent) are called centered [40, Section 1.3], hence the abbreviation.
In the language of topological spaces, neighborhood morphisms correspond to maps that are both continuous and open. Such maps are often called interior maps [44, Section III.3]. On the other hand, continuous maps are the ones that satisfy only the left-to-right implication of (2.1).
We write PreTopint for the category of pre-topological spaces and interior maps, and Topint for its full subcategory consisting of topological spaces. Clearly both PreTopint and

20

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Topint are full subcategories of FF. Moreover, we have: PreTopint = FF(Cent) and Topint = FF(Cent, iv),
where FF(Cent) and FF(Cent, iv) are the full subcategories of FF whose objects satisfy (Cent) and (Cent, iv), respectively.
The duals of topological spaces are given by complete atomic interior algebras, and the duals of pre-topological spaces by complete atomic pre-interior algebras.
Definition 4.10. (1) A pre-interior algebra is a modal algebra (B, ) that satisfies
(T) b  b.
If B is complete and atomic, (B, ) is a complete atomic pre-interior algebra. (2) An interior algebra is a pre-interior algebra (B, ) that satisfies
(4) b  b.
If B is complete and atomic, (B, ) is a complete atomic interior algebra.
Remark 4.11. (1) The dual concept of interior operator is that of closure operator. Interior algebras were first introduced by McKinsey and Tarski [41] in the language of closure operators and under the name of closure algebras. Rasiowa and Sikorski [44] called these algebras topological Boolean algebras. The name interior algebra is due to Blok [16]. (2) Generalizing closure on a powerset to pre-closure yields the notion of Cech closure spaces [56, Definition 14.A.1]. This provides an alternate language to talk about complete atomic pre-interior algebras.
Complete atomic pre-interior algebras are simply CANAs that satisfy (N), (C), and (T). We write PreInt for the full subcategory of CANA whose objects are pre-interior algebras. Then PreInt is a full subcategory of caMA. Let Int be the full subcategory of PreInt consisting of interior algebras.
Given a neighborhood frame (X, N ) a straightforward verification (see, e.g., [18, Section 7.4]) shows that:
(X, N ) validates (Cent) iff its dual (X, N ) validates (T). (X, N ) validates (iv) iff its dual (X, N ) validates (4).
Thus, we arrive at the following duality theorems:
Theorem 4.12. The dual equivalence from Theorem 4.6 restricts to PreInt op PreTopint and Int op Topint.
Remark 4.13. The object part of the dual equivalence Int op Topint dates back to McKinsey and Tarski [41], and the morphism part to Rasiowa and Sikorski [44, Section III.3]. See [11] for more details.
Remark 4.14. Restricting Theorem 4.12 further gives rise to dualities for the categories of T0-spaces, T1-spaces, P -spaces (that is, topological spaces whose topology is closed under

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

21

countable intersections), and Alexandrov spaces (topological spaces whose topology is closed under arbitrary intersections), with interior maps as morphisms.

Remark 4.15. Other topology-like spaces are the so-called "generalized topological spaces" of Csa´sza´r [19]. Proving correspondence results for the relevant axioms gives rise to a duality for such spaces in a similar manner as for pre-topological spaces.

The findings of this section can be summarized in the following diagram. The horizontal arrows indicate full inclusions of categories. The vertical arrows denote dual equivalences, and are labelled with the relevant theorem or example.

KF

Top PreTop

FF

MF

CNF

NF

ContF

Exm. 3.23 Thm. 4.12 Thm. 4.12 Thm. 4.6 Thm. 4.3 Thm. 4.5 Exm. 3.22 Thm. 4.4

CAMA

Int

PreInt

caMA CABAM CACA CANA CAContA

5. Jo´nsson-Tarski type dualties
In this section we derive categorical dualities for classes of neighborhood algebras that are not necessarily complete and atomic. While this simplifies the algebraic side of our story, it requires extra structure on the frame side of the duality: we now have to work with descriptive neighborhood frames [20]. For this we work with one-step axioms in the standard modal language with finitary connectives. As corollaries we derive J´onsson-Tarski duality for modal algebras and Dosen duality for neighborhood algebras.
Our main contribution is to define an analogue of B on Stone spaces by modifying the celebrated Vietoris construction. As a result, we obtain a new endofunctor on Stone and show that the category of coalgebras for this endofunctor is isomorphic to the category of descriptive neighborhood frames of [20, Section 2]. The Vietoris space of a Stone space X is embeddable in this new hyperspace of X as a closed subspace.
5.1. Descriptive neighborhood frames. We start by recalling the definition of a descriptive neighborhood frame, first introduced by Dosen [20, Section 2]. However, to be in line with standard practice in modal logic, our definition of general frames deviates slightly from that of Dosen in that Dosen's definition requires that all neighborhoods are admissible, while we view this as an additional tightness condition. So our tight general frames correspond to Dosen's general frames.
Subsequently, we define a new endofunctor on Stone generalizing the Vietoris endofunctor, and show that the category of descriptive neighborhood frames can be viewed as the category of coalgebras for this endofunctor.
Definition 5.1. (1) A general (neighborhood ) frame is a tuple (X, N, A) consisting of a neighborhood frame (X, N ) and a Boolean subalgebra A of PX such that A is closed under N : PX  PX given by
N a = {x  X | a  N (x)}.
(2) A general frame (X, N, A) is tight if N (x)  A for all x  X.

22

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

(3) A general frame (X, N, A) is differentiated if for all distinct x, y  X there is a  A such that x  a and y / a; and compact if whenever A  A has the finite intersection property, then A = .
(4) A descriptive (neighborhood ) frame is a general frame that is differentiated, compact, and tight.
(5) A general frame morphism from (X, N, A) to (X , N , A ) is a neighborhood frame morphism f : (X, N )  (X , N ) such that f -1(a )  A for all a  A . We denote the category of descriptive frames and general frame morphisms by DNF.

Let (X, N, A) be a descriptive frame. As usual, we can generate a topology A on X using A as a base. The space (X, A) is compact and Hausdorff because (X, N, A) is compact and differentiated. Moreover, it is zero-dimensional because A is closed under complements,
and hence (X, A) is a Stone space. A subset a  X is in A iff it is clopen in (X, A), so we can recover A from the Stone topology.
Since A = clpX and N (x)  A, it makes sense to define a functor D on Stone that sends X  Stone to P(clpX). The choice of topology on P(clpX) is motivated by the desideratum to turn DX into a Stone space, and is a generalization of the Vietoris topology.

Definition 5.2. The D-hyperspace DX of a Stone space X is the space P(clpX) whose topology is generated by the clopen subbase

a = {W  P(clpX) | a  W },

a = {W  P(clpX) | X \ a / W },

where a ranges over the clopen subsets of X. For a continuous function f : X  X between Stone spaces, define Df : DX  DX by
Df (W ) = {a  clpX | f -1(a )  W }.

Lemma 5.3. The assignment D defines an endofunctor on Stone.

Proof. To see that D is well defined, we first show that DX is a Stone space. Zerodimensionality of DX follows from the fact that it is generated by a base that is closed under complementation. (Indeed, for all a  clpX we have DX \ a = (X \ a) and DX \ a = (X \ a).) To see that DX is Hausdorff, suppose that W, W  DX are distinct. Then there must be an a  clpX such that either a  W and a / W , or a / W and a  W . In either case a and (X \ a) provide two disjoint open subsets of DX separating W and W.
For compactness, by the Alexander subbase theorem, it suffices to prove that every open cover consisting of subbasic (cl)opens has a finite subcover. So suppose

DX =

a

b,

(5.1)

aA

bB

where A, B  clpX. Consider

W = {X \ b | b  B}  DX.

By construction, this is in none of the b, so there must be a  A such that W  a . But this means a = X \ b for some b  B. Consequently, if V is an arbitrary element of DX such that V / a , then V  DX \ a = (X \ a ) = b . Therefore,

DX = a  b ,

so we have found a finite subcover of the cover in (5.1). Thus, DX is a Stone space.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

23

PP

Finally, we show that D is well defined on morphisms. Let f : X  X be a morphism in Stone. In order to prove that Df is continuous it suffices to show that (Df )-1( a ) is clopen in DX for all a  clpX . (The case for diamonds follows by working with complements.) So let a  clpX . Then
(Df )-1( a ) = {W  DX | a  Df (W )} = {W  DX | f -1(a )  W } = f -1(a ),
which is clopen in DX. Consequently, D is well defined. Functoriality follows from the fact that UD is a subfunctor of BU , where B = and U : Stone  Set is the forgetful functor.
Theorem 5.4. DNF = Coalg(D).
Proof. For isomorphism on objects, if (X, N, A) is a descriptive neighborhood frame and A is the topology on X generated by A, then N is a function from X = (X, A) to DX which is continuous because A is closed under N defined in Definition 5.1(1). Thus, (X, N ) is a D-coalgebra.
Conversely, a D-coalgebra (X, ) gives rise to the descriptive neighborhood frame (X, N, clpX), where X is the set underlying X and N is defined by N (x) = (x). Continuity of  entails that clpX is closed under N .
The isomorphism on morphisms follows from a straightforward verification.
Remark 5.5. The Vietoris functor V is a subfunctor of D via the natural transformation  : V  D defined on components by
X : VX  DX : c  {a  clpX | c  a}.
This gives rise to a functor  : Coalg(V)  Coalg(D), defined on objects by sending (X, )  Coalg(V) to
X  VX X DX
and on morphisms by f = f . Specifically, if (X, ) is a V-coalgebra, then the corresponding D-coalgebra is given by (X, N ), where N (x) = {a  clpX | (x)  a}. The descriptive neighborhood frames lying in the image of  are precisely those descriptive frames validating (N) and (C); see also Example 5.16.
5.2. Functor dualities. Like we did in Section 3.3, we can use one-step axioms to prove that certain quotient functors of N from Proposition 2.6(1) are Stone-dual to subfunctors of D.
Since N is an endofunctor on BA, we can only take quotients with finitary axioms. These are axioms that have finite conjunctions and disjunctions. Since this implies that axioms can only contain a finite number of variables, it suffices to work with a countable set of variables. Thus, we will work with the standard modal language, viewed as a sublanguage of L .
Definition 5.6. A finitary axiom is a formula in the language L (defined as in Definition 3.1). A finitary one-step axiom is a formula in the language (L )1.
We define assignments and satisfaction of these axioms in neighborhood algebras as in Definition 3.2. That is, an assignment for a neighborhood algebra (B, ) is a function  : V  B and extends uniquely to a map  : L  B, and we say (B, )  if () = 1 for every assignment .

24

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Furthermore, the assignment  gives rise to a map  : (L )1  N B which interprets finitary one-step axioms in N B in the same manner as in Definition 3.4.
Definition 5.7. Let Ax be a collection of finitary one-step axioms. For B  BA, define NAxB to be the free Boolean algebra generated by { b | b  B} modulo the congruence relation Ax generated by {() Ax 1}, where  ranges over Ax and  over the assignments V  B. For a homomorphism h : B  B define NAxh on generators by NAxh( b) = h(b). Then NAx defines a functor BA  BA.
Example 5.8. Again, well-known functors can be obtained via this procedure. Of course, if we take Ax = , then we get N = N . Similarly, the axioms
(N) (C) v  v  (v  v )

give rise to the endofunctor on BA whose algebras are normal modal algebras.

Like in Section 3, for each NAx we can define a dual functor DAx. The functor DAx arises as a subfunctor of D. In particular, this means that for every Stone space X, the space DAxX is a subspace of DX.

Definition 5.9. Let X be a Stone space and B its dual Boolean algebra of clopens. For a finitary one-step formula  and an assignment  : V  B of the variables we define the clopen neighborhood t[] recursively by
( v)t[] = v((a))
t[] = PB
(¬)t[] = PB \ t[]
(  )t[] = t[]  t[]
Let  be a finitary one-step axiom. Then we call W  DX a -subset of A if W  t[] for every assignment  of the variables V. If Ax is a collection of finitary one-step axioms, then we say that W is an Ax-subset if W is a -subset for all axioms   Ax.

The next lemma is an analogue of Lemma 3.16 in the setting of descriptive frames.

Lemma 5.10. Ultrafilters of NAxB correspond bijectively to Ax-subsets of B.

Proof. The bijection is established by sending an ultrafilter of NAxB (viewed as a homomorphism p : NAxB  2) to the set

Wp = {b  B | p( b) = 1}  B,

(5.2)

and by sending any Ax-subset W  B to the map pW : NAxB  2 defined on generators by pW ( b) = 1 iff b  W . The remainder of the proof can be obtained from the proof of Lemma 3.16 by replacing "L" with "N ", "LAx" with "NAx", "complete homomorphism" with "homomorphism", and "complete congruence" with "congruence".

We can now define the functor DAx in a similar manner to BAx from Definition 3.18.

Definition 5.11. For a Stone space X, let DAxX be the subspace of DX whose objects are Ax-subset of clpX. For a continuous function f : X  X let DAxf be the restriction of Df to DAxX.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

25

While for any set X the set BAxX is automatically a subset of BX, in our current setting it is not guaranteed that DAxX is a Stone subspace of DX. The next proposition ensures that this is indeed the case.

Proposition 5.12. DAx is an endofunctor on Stone.

Proof. Let X be a Stone space. In order to show that DAxX is again a Stone space it suffices to prove that it is a closed subspace of DX. Note that t[] is a clopen subset of DX for any

finitary one-step axiom  and assignment  : V  clpX. By definition, the set underlying

DAxX is given by

{t[] |   Ax,  : V  clpX}  DX.

(5.3)

Since this is the intersection of clopen subsets of DX, it is a closed subset of DX. That DAx is well defined on morphisms can be proven as in Proposition 3.19, and
functoriality of DAx follows from functoriality of D.

The next theorem is an analogue of Theorem 3.20 in the setting of descriptive frames.

Theorem 5.13 (Stone Functor Duality Theorem). Let Ax be a collection of finitary one-step axioms. Then the functors NAx and DAx are Stone-duals.

Proof. We view ultrafilters as homomorphisms, so for example when we say p  uf (NAx(clpX)) we view p as a homomorphism NAx(clpX)  2. For a Stone space X, define the function X : uf (NAx(clpX))  DAxX by p  Wp (defined as in (5.2)). This yields a bijection on objects by Lemma 5.10.
To see that X is continuous, recall that the topology on DX is generated by a and a, where a ranges over the clopens of X. So the topology on DAxX is generated by

a  DAxX,

a  DAxX,

where a ranges over the clopen subsets of X. Also, recall that for any Boolean algebra B,

the topology on uf B is generated by set of the form (a) = {p  uf B | p(a) = 1}, where

a  B. Continuity of X now follows from the fact that

-1(
X

a  DAx(X)) = {p  uf (NAx(clpX)) | p(

a) = 1} = (

a)

is

open

in

uf (NAx(clpX)),

and

similarly

-1(
X

a) = (¬

¬a).

Since X is a continuous

bijection between Stone spaces, it is a homeomorphism, i.e., an isomorphism in Stone.

Finally, we prove that the assignment  = (X)XStone : uf  NAx  clp  DAx is natural by showing that for every continuous function f : X  X the diagram

uf (NAx(clpX)) X DAxX

uf (NAx(clpf ))
uf (NAx(clpX )) X

DAx f
DAxX

26

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

commutes. To this end, let p  uf (NAx(clpX)) and a  clpX . Then a  DAxf  X(p) iff X(p)(f -1(a )) = 1 iff p( f -1(a )) = 1

iff p(NAx(clpf )( a )) = 1

iff uf (NAx(clpf ))(p)( a ) = 1

This proves the theorem.

iff a  X  uf (NAx(clpf ))(p).

Corollary 5.14. For every set Ax of finitary one-step axioms, we have Alg(NAx) op Coalg(DAx).
Some well-known dualities are instantiations of Corollary 5.14.

Example 5.15. If we take Ax = , then we recover Dosen's duality for descriptive neighborhood frames [20, Theorem 6]:
NA = Alg(N ) op Coalg(D) = DNF.

Example 5.16. We can derive Jo´nsson-Tarski duality for normal modal algebras as follows. As we pointed out in Remark 5.5, V = D{(N),(C)}. Moreover, it is immediate from the definition of N{(N),(C)} that MA = Alg(N{(N),(C)}). Therefore,
MA = Alg(N{(N),(C)}) op Coalg(D{(N),(C)}) = Coalg(V) = DKF.
Corollary 5.14 also gives rise to the notion of a descriptive contingency frame, as shown in the next example.

Example 5.17. Since (Cont) is a finitary axiom, it gives rise to the notions of contingency neighborhood algebras, descriptive contingency neighborhood frames, and a duality between them. A contingency neighborhood algebra is a neighborhood algebra (B, ) such that
b = ¬b. We write CNA for the full subcategory of NA of contingency neighborhood algebras. A descriptive contingency neighborhood frame is a D(Cont)-coalgebra. Explicitly we can describe these as tuples (X, N, A) such that (X, N, A) is a descriptive neighborhood frame and (X, N ) is a contingency neighborhood frame. Writing DCNF for the full subcategory of DNF whose objects are descriptive contingency neighborhood frames, we obtain:
CNA = Alg(N(Cont)) op Coalg(D(Cont)) = DCNF.

5.3. Forgetting incorrectly. Just like (Cont) in Example 5.17, the axiom (M) is also finitary. Therefore, we get functors N(M) and D(M) (shorthand for N{(M)} and D{(M)}) such that Alg(N(M)) op Coalg(D(M)). Moreover, we have
Alg(N(M)) = BAM.
Thus, one may think that the coalgebras in Coalg(D(M)) give a suitable notion of descriptive monotone frames. However, care is needed: if we take a D(M)-coalgebra and forget about the topology, we do not obtain a B(M)-coalgebra. Indeed, since only clopen sets are allowed to serve as neighborhoods of a state, the collection of neighborhoods at a state need not be upward closed under inclusion. We give an example of this phenomenon.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

27

Example 5.18. Let X = N  {} and generate a topology  on X by the finite subsets of N and cofinite sets containing . Thus, X = (X,  ) is the one-point compactification of the discrete space N. Clearly X is a Stone space. Define  : X  D(M)X by
(x) = clpX.
Then (X, ) is a D(M)-coalgebra. However, (X, ) does not define a B(M)-coalgebra because Nodd = {x  N | x is odd } is not clopen, hence it is not in (x), while both   (x) and   Nodd.
A similar problem occurs with descriptive convex frames. In fact, Example 5.18 also shows that if we forget about the topological structure of a D(Conv)-coalgebra, then we do not necessarily end up with a B(Conv)-coalgebra because   Nodd  X and , X  (x). One way to remedy this is by looking at canonical extensions. Such an approach was carried out in [34] for the special case of monotone frames. We explore this idea in the next section.
6. Canonical extensions
In this section we discuss - and -extensions of (descriptive) neighborhood algebras. In general, these extensions are not functorial. However, we show that adding the convexity and co-convexity axioms yields functoriality of - and -extensions, respectively. We also show that adding these axioms allows us to view descriptive frames as categories of coalgebras. We use this to give an alternative coalgebraic proof of the duality for monotone Boolean algebra expansions of [35].
6.1. - and -exensions. There is an obvious forgetful functor DNF  NF. Although this forgetful functor is conveniently simple, it has an undesirable property: it "leaves gaps." For example, if (X, N, A) is a monotone descriptive frame, then (X, N ) is not generally a monotone frame. Indeed, monotonicity now only holds with respect to admissible sets (clopens). Similarly, if (X, N, A) is a normal descriptive frame and RN is the relation that arises from N via RN (x) = N (x), then we would prefer that the underlying neighborhood frame be normal as well. This would be the case if (X, N ) satisfied a  N (x) iff RN [x]  a for each a  X. Again, since N (x) contains only admissible subsets of X, this need not be the case.2
To remedy this, we explore alternatives to the forgetful functor. These are dual versions of the well-known - and -extensions from the theory of canonical extensions (see, e.g., [37, 27, 25, 28]):
Definition 6.1. Let A be a CABA and B a Boolean subalgebra of A.
(1) B is called dense in A if every element in A is the join of meets of elements in B. (2) We say that B is compact in A if for all sets S, T  B with S  T in A, there
exist finite S  S and T  T such that S  T . (3) A canonical extension of a Boolean algebra B is a pair (B, e) where B is a CABA
and e : B  B is a Boolean embedding such that e[B] is dense and compact in B.
2For example, let X = N  {} be the one-point compactification of N with the discrete topology and X the set underlying X. For each x  X let N (x) be the collection of co-finite subsets of X containing . Then it is easy to see that (X, N, clpX) is a descriptive neighborhood frame, that RN (x) = {}, but that {} / N (x).

28

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Remark 6.2. It is well known [37] that the canonical extension of a Boolean algebra is
unique up to isomorphism, and can explicitly be described as the powerset of the dual Stone space of B. Thus, we often speak of B as the canonical extension of B and view B as sitting inside B.

Let : B  B be a endofunction (not necessarily a homomorphism). Then we can extend to a function B  B in several ways. Two well-known extensions are the and -extensions. To define these, we recall the notions of closed and open elements of B
[37, Definition 1.20]. We say that x  B is closed if it is a meet of elements from B, and x is open if it is a
join of elements from B. We write KB and OB for the sets of closed and open elements of B, respectively. The - and -extensions of : B  B are now defined by

x =

{ b | b  B and c  b  d} | c  KB, d  OB, c  x  d

x =

{ b | b  B and c  b  d} | c  KB, d  OB, c  x  d

These give maps ,  : NA  CANA, which in turn give rise to ,  : DNF  NF by composing as follows:

 = at    clp and  = at    clp.

Thus we have the following diagram:

uf
NA
clp 

DNF


(6.1)

at

CANA

NF



We point out that ,  : NA  CANA are not necessarily functors (see [12, Example 3.4 and Remark 3.5]), and hence neither are  and . We shall temporarily ignore this issue and focus solely on the action of  and  on objects.
We next define  and  explicitly. For this we need the notions of closed and open elements of (X, N, A). These are defined to be the closed and open sets of the topological space X = (X, A), and denoted by KA and OA, respectively. Finally, for c, d  PX define [c, d] = {e  PX | c  e  d}.

Definition 6.3. Let (X, N, A) be a descriptive neighborhood frame.

(1) Define the -extension of N by N (x) = {e  PX | c  KA, d  OA with c  e  d and [c, d]  A  N (x)}, and set (X, N, A) = (X, N ).
(2) Define the -extension of N by N (x) = {e  PX | c  KA, d  OA with c  e  d we have [c, d]  A  N (x) = },
and set (X, N, A) = (X, N ).

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

29

Proposition 6.4. The following diagrams commute on objects, up to natural isomorphism.

uf

NA

DNF

clp





uf

NA

DNF

clp





at

CANA

NF



at

CANA

NF



Proof. Let (X, N, A) be a descriptive neighborhood frame. Recall that N a = {x  X | a 

N (x)} for a  A. Then (A, N ) is the dual modal algebra of (X, N, A). It is well known

that the canonical extension of A is X. Write (X, N ) for the neighborhood frame dual to

(A ,

 N

).

We

aim

to

show

that

for

all

x



X

and

e



X

we

have

e



N

(x)

iff

e



N (x).

By definition,

 N

e

=

{ N a | a  A, c  a  d} | c  KA, d  OA, c  e  d .

Thus, e  N (x) iff x 

 N

e,

which

happens

iff

there

are

closed

c

and

open

d

such

that

c  e  d and a  [c, d]  A implies x  N a. The latter means that we have a  N (x) for

all such a, and hence c and d witness the fact that e  N (x).

A similar reasoning proves the statement for -extensions.

The extensions  and  are closely related. To see this, we need the notion of dual (descriptive) neighborhood frames.

Definition 6.5. For a neighborhood frame (X, N ), define
N c : X  PPX : x  {a  X | a / N (x)}.
We call (X, N )c := (X, N c) the complement of (X, N ). If (X, N, A) is a descriptive neighborhood frame, then we define
NAc : X  PPX : x  {a  A | a / N (x)}. It is easy to see that (X, NAc , A) is again a descriptive frame. We call (X, NAc , A) the complement of (X, N, A) and denote it by (X, N, A)c.
It is easy to see that ((X, N )c)c = (X, N ). Moreover, (·)c : NF  NF defines an involution, where f c = f for a neighborhood morphism f . Similar statements hold for descriptive frames and the descriptive complement.

Proposition 6.6. Let (X, N, A) be a descriptive neighborhood frame. Then

(X, N, A) = ((X, NAc , A))c.

Consequently, (X, N, A) = ((X, NAc , A))c.

Proof. Note that ((X, NAc , A))c = (X, ((NAc ))c). We need to prove that for all x  X and

e  X we have

e  N (x) iff e  ((NAc ))c(x).

(6.2)

We do so by unravelling the definitions.

For x  X and e  X we have e  ((NAc ))c(x) iff e / (NAc )(x). In other words, e  ((NAc ))c(x) iff we can find no closed c  KA and open d  OA such that c  e  d and [c, d]  A  N c(x). Therefore, e  ((NAc ))c(x) iff for all c  KA and d  OA such that c  e  d we have [c, d]  A  N (x) = . But this is exactly the definition of e  N (x), so

(6.2) holds.

30

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

6.2. - and -descriptive frames. As we have seen in Section 5.3, we do not always have a forgetful functor U : Coalg(DAx)  Coalg(BAx). In particular, recall that convexity and monotonicity are not preserved. This is, in part, solved by replacing U with either  or .
If (X, N, A) is monotone, then the definition of N  simplifies to
N (x) = {e  PX | c  KA with c  e and [c, X]  A  N (x)}. It is then easy to see that the neighborhood frame (X, N, A) = (X, N ) is monotone as well. Next suppose (X, N, A) is convex and there are e, e  N (x) and e  X such that e  e  e . Then by definition of N  we have closed sets c, c and open sets d, d such that e  [c, d], e  [c , d ], [c, d]  A  N (x) and [c , d ]  A  N (x). Since c  e  e  e  d , convexity of (X, N, A) implies [c, d ]  A  N (x). This, in turn, witnesses the fact that e  N (x). Therefore, (X, N ) is a convex neighborhood frame.
Thus, on objects we have the following well-defined assignments:
 : Coalg(D(M))  Coalg(B(M)) and  : Coalg(D(Conv))  Coalg(B(Conv)).
From the connection between  and  discussed in Proposition 6.6 we get that
 : Coalg(D(M))  Coalg(B(M)) and  : Coalg(D(CoConv))  Coalg(B(CoConv))
are well-defined assignments as well. Here (CoConv) denotes the co-convexity axiom

(CoConv) v  (v  v )  (v  v )
On neighborhood frames (X, N ) this corresponds to N c(x) being convex for all x  X. We can turn the assignments  and  into "proper" forgetful functors by incorporating
the additional neighborhoods that arise from  or  into the notion of a descriptive frame. This yields two alternative definitions of descriptive frames: -descriptive and -descriptive frames. In what follows we will focus on -descriptive frames, leaving the dual treatment of -descriptive frames to the reader.
Definition 6.7. A -descriptive neighborhood frame is a general neighborhood frame (X, N, A) that is differentiated and compact (see Definition 5.1) and satisfies the following modification of the tightness condition: for all x  X and e  PX
e  N (x) iff c  KA, d  OA with c  e  d and [c, d]  A  N (x). We write DNF for the category of -descriptive neighborhood frames and general neighborhood morphisms.
If (X, N, A) is a descriptive neighborhood frame, then (X, N , A) is a -descriptive neighborhood frame. Conversely, given a -descriptive neighborhood frame (X, N, A), setting NA(x) = N (x)  A yields a descriptive neighborhood frame (X, NA, A). It is straightforward to see that these two assignments give rise to a bijective correspondence between objects in DNF and objects in DNF. Thus, the following diagram commutes on objects, where U is the forgetful functor that does not add any neighborhoods:
DNF 1-1 DNF



U

NF

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

31

While in descriptive neighborhood frames (Definition 5.1) the tightness condition stipulates that all neighborhoods are admissible sets, -tightness allows non-admissible sets to act as neighborhoods too.
Remark 6.8. Let DNF be the category of -descriptive frames, defined analogously to Definition 6.7. That is, a -descriptive frame is a general neighborhood frame that is differentiated and compact and satisfies for all x  X and e  X:
e  N (x) iff c  KA, d  OA with c  e  d we have [c, d]  A  N (x) = .
We have that (X, N, A) is -descriptive iff (X, NAc , A) is -descriptive. Moreover, f : (X, N, A)  (X , N , A ) is a general morphism between -descriptive frames iff f is a general morphism between (X, NAc , A) and (X , (N )cA, A ). Thus, we obtain an isomorphism between DNF and DNF.
Write DNF(Ax) for the full subcategory of DNF such that the axioms in Ax are satisfied when interpreting the variables v as clopens. Write also UAx : DNF(Ax)  Coalg(BAx) for the functor that sends a -descriptive neighborhood frame to its underlying frame (viewed as a coalgebra). If UAx is well defined, then it is automatically a functor, because the additional (non-admissible) neighborhoods of -descriptive frames ensure that every morphism in DNF(Ax) is in particular a neighborhood morphism between the underlying neighborhood frames.
While the introduction of -descriptive frames ensures that UAx : DNF(Ax)  Coalg(BAx) becomes a functor, it only moves the problem of functoriality elsewhere. Indeed, we are not guaranteed that the categories Alg(NAx) is dual to DNF(Ax).
In Section 6.3 we will prove that whenever Ax implies (Conv), then
(1) DNF(Ax) is a category of coalgebras for an endofunctor DA x on Stone; and (2) NAx is dual to DA x.
Combined, these give the dual equivalence Alg(NAx) op Coalg(DA x) = DNF(Ax).

6.3. When are  and  functors? In this section we give a sufficient condition for DA x to be a functor.

Definition 6.9. Let X be a Stone space with the underlying set X. We write KX and OX for the closed and open sets of X and define DX to be the space consisting of W  PX
that satisfy

e  W iff c  KX, d  OX with c  e  d and [c, d]  clpX  W.

The topology on DX is generated by the clopen subbase

a = {W | a  W },

a = {W | X \ a / W },

where a ranges over clpX.
Using the fact that elements of DX are determined uniquely by the clopens of X they contain, combined with assignments similar to the ones in the paragraph following Definition 6.7, it is easy to see that DX is homeomorphic to DX. Therefore, DX is a Stone space. Moreover, W  DX is an Ax-subset (see Definition 5.9) iff W  clpX  DX is an Ax-subset. Thus, we define:

32

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

Definition 6.10. For a Stone space X, let DA xX be the subspace of DX whose elements are Ax-subsets. For a continuous function f : X  X , we define
DA xf : DA xX  DA xX : W  {w  X | f -1(w )  W }.
Since DA xX is homeomorphic to DAxX, we have that DA x sends a Stone space to a Stone space. Furthermore, this implies that DA x is naturally isomorphic to DAx whenever the former is well defined. We prove that it is well defined when Ax implies (Conv).

Theorem 6.11. Let Ax be a set of finitary one-step axioms such that Ax implies (Conv). Then DA x defines an endofunctor on Stone.

Proof. We have already seen that DA x is well defined on objects, and functoriality is straightforward because it is a subfunctor of B. Therefore, we only have to prove that
for every continuous function f : X  X , the assignment DA xf : DA xX  DA xX is a well-defined continuous function.
Continuity follows from the fact that (DA xf )-1( a ) = f -1(a ) for all a  clpX . So all that is left is to prove that DA xf (W )  DA xX for all W  DA xX. That is, we need to show that for all e  X ,

e  DA xf (W ) iff c  KX , d  OX with c  e  d and [c , d ]  clpX  DA xf (W ).

(6.3)

First assume e  DA xf (W ). Then f -1(e )  W and so there exist c  KX and d  OX such that c  f -1(e)  d and [c, d]  clpX  W . Define c = f [c] and d = X \ f [X \ d]. Since f is a continuous function between Stone spaces, it sends closed sets to closed sets,

so c  KX and d  OX . Furthermore, we claim that c  e  d . The first inclusion is
obvious. For the second, if x / d , then there is x  X \ d such that f (x) = x . But then x / d, so x / f -1(e ), and hence x = f (x) / e .

We claim that c and d witness that the right-hand side of (6.3) holds. Let a  clpX such that c  a  d . Then c  f -1(a ) by definition of c . Furthermore, f -1(d )  d. To

see this, x / d implies x  X \ d, so f (x)  f [X \ d]. Therefore, f (x) / X \ f [X \ d] = d , and hence x / f -1(d ). Thus, f -1(a )  d. By assumption this implies that f -1(a )  W .
Consequently, a  DA xf (W ). Next we prove the converse of (6.3). Suppose e  X is such that the right-hand side

holds. Denote the relevant closed and open subsets of X witnessing this by c and d . We aim to show that f -1(e )  W . To prove this, it suffices to show that there exist a closed
and open subsets c and d of X such that c  f -1(e )  d and [c, d]  clpX  W . Take c = f -1(c ) and d = f -1(d ). By continuity of f these are closed and open,

respectively. Now let a  clpX be such that c  a  d. To prove that a  W , we construct b1, b2  clpX such that b1, b2  DA xf (W ) and f -1(b1)  a  f -1(b2). Convexity of W then implies that a  W .

To construct b1, since c is closed, we have that c = {k  clpX | c  k }. Therefore,

c = f -1(c ) = f -1(k ) | k  clpX and c  k  a.

Since a is clopen, compactness yields a finite number k1, . . . , km  clpX from the intersection such that c  f -1(k1)  · · ·  f -1(km)  a. A similar compactness argument yields a finite number of clopens km+1, . . . , kn from the intersection such that km+1  · · ·  kn  d . Setting b1 := k1  · · ·  kn gives an element in clpX such that f -1(b1)  a. Moreover, we have b1  DA xf (W ) because c  b1  d .

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

33

Finally, to construct b2, since d is open, we have d = {k  clpX | k  d }. A similar argument to the above yields b2 satisfying all the required properties. This proves that a  W , hence f -1(e )  W , completing the proof.

The definition of descriptive monotone frames from [35] coincides with the definition of -descriptive neighborhood frames satisfying monotonicity. Let us write HDMF for the category of such descriptive monotone frames, as defined in Section 2.4.2 of op. cit. The algebraic semantics of monotone modal logic is given by monotone Boolean algebra expansions (BAMs), and we write BAM for the full subcategory of NA whose objects are BAMs [35, Section 2.4.1]. As a consequence of Theorem 6.11 we now obtain the duality from [35, Theorem 2.11] as an algebra/coalgebra duality.

Corollary 6.12 (Hansen-Kupke). BAM op HDMF.
Proof. One can prove that BAM = Alg(N(M)) in the same way as in Proposition 2.6(1). Moreover, HDMF = Coalg(UpV) [35, Theorem 3.12], where UpV is the endofunctor on Stone defined in Definition 3.9 of op. cit. There is a natural isomorphism  : D(M)  UpV given on components by
X : D(M)X  UpVX : W  {c  W | c is closed in X}.
This is injective because if W, V  D(M) are distinct, then there exists a  clpX such that a  W and a / V , or a / W and a  V . Since clopen sets are in particular closed, this implies that X(W ) = X(V ), so X is injective. Moreover, it is surjective. To see this, observe that for all W  UpVX the set W  = {e  X | c  W such that c  e} is in D(M)X and satisfies X(W ) = W . So  is a bijective continuous function, hence a homeomorphism.
Combining Theorems 5.13 and 6.11 yields that N(M) is dual to UpV. The composition BAM = Alg(N(M)) op Coalg(UpV) = HDMF
proves the desired duality.

Corollary 6.13. Let Ax be a collection of finitary one-step axioms that implies (Conv).
Then Alg(NAx) op Coalg(DA x).

Proof. Combine Corollary 5.14, Theorem 6.11, and the fact that DAx is naturally isomorphic

to DA x to obtain

Alg(NAx) op Coalg(DAx) = Coalg(DA x).

Corollary 6.14. Let Ax be a collection of finitary one-step axioms that implies (Conv). If the restriction Ax of  to Coalg(DAx) lands in Coalg(BAx), then Ax is a functor.

Proof. If Ax is well defined, then so is UAx, and hence UAx is a functor (as we pointed out after Remark 6.8). Since Ax can be obtained as the composition of functors
Coalg(DAx) = Coalg(DA x) UAx Coalg(BAx)

Ax
it is a functor as well.

34

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

We can now obtain relatively easily the commuting diagrams relating the Jo´nsson-Tarski type and Thomason type dualities for a large class of modal logics. These are analogues of the diagrams for basic normal modal logic depicted in (1.1). We formulate this as a general statement, and then instantiate it to basic monotone modal logic. Observe that this still requires a preservation result reminiscent of a Sahlqvist theorem, proving that validity of axioms on a -descriptive neighborhood frame implies validity of the axioms on the underlying neighborhood frame (see, e.g., [46] or [15, Section 5.6]). We leave the search for such theorems to future research.

Theorem 6.15. Let Ax be a collection of finitary one-step axioms that implies (Conv). Suppose that for every Stone space X, every Ax-neighborhood W of DX is also an Axneighborhood of BX, where X is the set underlying X. Then the following diagram commutes
Alg(NAx) op Coalg(DAx) = Coalg(DA x)



Ax

Alg(LAx) op Coalg(BAx)

UAx

Example 6.16. As we have seen, examples of such Ax are Ax = {(Conv)} and Ax = {(M)}. The latter yields the following commuting diagrams, where all edges are functors:

Alg(N(M)) op Coalg(D(M)) = Coalg(D(M))

BAM op Coalg(D(M)) = HDMF



(M)

Alg(L(M)) op Coalg(B(M))

U(M)



(M)

CABAM op MF

U

7. Conclusions
We have given a general coalgebraic approach to Thomason type dualities for neighborhood frames and Jo´nsson-Tarski type dualities for neighborhood algebras. Furthermore, we have investigated the relationship between the two types of dualities via the theory of canonical extensions. We list several potential avenues for future research.
Infinitary modal logic: The Thomason type dualities from Sections 3 and 4 provide dualities for algebraic and geometric semantics for infinitary modal logic. While some interesting investigations have been conducted by Baltag [4, 5], obtaining a more general coalgebraic approach towards infinitary modal logic (also using the results of this paper) remains open.
Endofunctors as left adjoints: In [10] the functor H is obtained as the left adjoint of the forgetful functor from CABA to CSL--the category of complete meet-semilattices. In a similar way we can obtain the functor whose coalgebras are monotone neighborhood frames as the left adjoint of the forgetful functor CABA  Pos, and the functor whose coalgebras are filter frames arises as the left adjoint of CABA  SL, where SL is the category of (not necessarily complete) meet-semilattices. An interesting direction for future work is to investigate the connection between presentations of classes of algebras via adjoints of forgetful functors and via one-step axioms of infinitary logic.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

35

When are  and  functors? A different approach: In Section 6.3 we proved that in presence of the convexity axiom,  defines a functor. Another approach towards the same goal is by modifying the morphisms between (descriptive) neighborhood frames. If we define a -morphism to be a function between neighborhood frames that satisfies only the left-to-right implication in (2.1), then replacing neighborhood morphisms with morphisms ensures that  is a functor without adding any additional axioms. Considering such morphisms is natural for a number of reasons. For example, in the special case of topological spaces they simply correspond to continuous maps. They also generalize the stable morphisms studied in [8, 9] to the setting of (descriptive) neighborhood frames. We plan to investigate this topic further in a sequel to this paper.
References
[1] S. Abramsky. A Cook's tour of the finitary non-well-founded sets. Invited Lecture at BCTCS, 1988. Available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1111.7148, 1988.
[2] J. Ada´mek, H. Herrlich, and G. E. Strecker. Abstract and Concrete Categories ­ The Joy of Cats. Dover Publications, New York, 2009. Available at http://katmat.math.uni-bremen.de/acc/acc.pdf.
[3] Z. Bakhtiari, H. van Ditmarsch, and H. H. Hansen. Neighbourhood contingency bisimulation. In Proc. ICLA 2017, volume 10119 of LNCS, pages 48­63. Springer, 2017.
[4] A. Baltag. A Structural Theory of Sets. PhD thesis, Indiana University, 1998. [5] A. Baltag. STS: A structural theory of sets. In M. Zakharyaschev, K. Segerberg, M. de Rijke, and
H. Wansing, editors, Proc. AIML 1998, pages 1­34. CSLI Publications, 2000. [6] J. Barwise and S. Feferman. Model-Theoretic Logics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1985. [7] J. L. Bell. Infinitary logic. In E. N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University, winter 2016 edition, 2016. [8] G. Bezhanishvili, N. Bezhanishvili, and R. Iemhoff. Stable canonical rules. Journal of Symbolic Logic,
81(1):284­315, 2016. [9] G. Bezhanishvili, N. Bezhanishvili, and J. Ilin. Stable modal logics. Review of Symbolic Logic, 11(3):436­
469, 2018. [10] G. Bezhanishvili, L. Carai, and P. J. Morandi. Coalgebras for the powerset functor and Thomason
duality, 2020. Submitted. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.01849. [11] G. Bezhanishvili and J. Harding. Raney algebras and duality for T0-spaces. Applied Categorical Structures,
28(6):963­973, 2020. [12] G. Bezhanishvili, R. Mines, and P. Morandi. Topo-canonical completions of closure algebras and Heyting
algebras. Algebra Universalis, 58(1):1­34, 2008. [13] G. Bezhanishvili, P. J. Morandi, and B. Olberding. An extension of de Vries duality to completely
regular spaces and compactifications. Topology and its Applications, 257:85­105, 2019. [14] N. Bezhanishvili, M. Bonsangue, D. Hansen, H. H.and Kozen, C. Kupke, P. Panangaden, and A. Silva.
Minimisation in logical form. To appear in Outstanding Contributions to Logic volume dedicated to Samson Abramsky. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11551, 2020. [15] P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke, and Y. Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001. [16] W. Blok. Varieties of Interior Algebras. PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam, 1976. [17] C. C. Chang. Some remarks on the model theory of infinitary languages. In J. Barwise, editor, The Syntax and Semantics of Infinitary Languages, pages 36­63, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1968. Springer-Verlag. [18] B. F. Chellas. Modal Logic: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980. [19] A´ . Cs´asz´ar. Generalized topology, generalized continuity. Acta Mathematica Hungarica, 96(4):351­357, 2002. [20] K Dosen. Duality between modal algebras and neighbourhood frames. Studia Logica, 48:219­234, 1989. [21] L. L. Esakia. Topological Kripke models. Soviet Math. Dokl, 15:147­151, 1974. [22] J. Fan. Neighborhood contingency logic: A new perspective. Studies in Logic, 11:37­55, 2018. [23] J. Fan and H. van Ditmarsch. Neighborhood contingency logic. In M. Banerjee and S. N. Krishna, editors, Proc. ICLA 2015, pages 88­99, Berlin Heidelberg, 2015. Springer-Verlag.

36

G. BEZHANISHVILI, N. BEZHANISHVILI, AND J. DE GROOT

[24] H. Gaifman. Infinite Boolean polynomials. I. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 54:229­250, 1964. [25] M. Gehrke and J. Harding. Bounded lattice expansions. Journal of Algebra, 238:345­371, 2001. [26] M. Gehrke, R. Jansana, and A. Palmigiano. 1-completions of a poset. Order, 30(1):39­64, 2013. [27] M. Gehrke and B. Jo´nsson. Bounded distributive lattices with operators. Mathematica Japonica, 40(2):207­
215, 1994. [28] M. Gehrke and B. Jo´nsson. Bounded distributive lattice expansions. Mathematica Scandinavica, 94(1):13­
45, 2004. [29] M. Gehrke and H. A. Priestley. Canonical extensions and completions of posets and lattices. Reports on
Mathematical Logic, 43:133­152, 2008. [30] S. Ghilardi. An algebraic theory of normal forms. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 71(3):189­245,
1995. [31] R. I. Goldblatt. Metamathematics of modal logic I. Reports on Mathematical Logic, 6:41­78, 1976. [32] A. W. Hales. On the non-existence of free complete Boolean algebras. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
54:45­66, 1964. [33] P. R. Halmos. The basic concepts of algebraic logic. The American Mathematical Monthly, 63:363­387,
1956. [34] H. H. Hansen. Monotonic modal logics. Master's thesis, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation,
University of Amsterdam, 2003. [35] H. H. Hansen and C. Kupke. A coalgebraic perspective on monotone modal logic. Electronic Notes in
Theoretical Computer Science, 106:121­143, 2004. [36] P.T. Johnstone. Stone Spaces. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University
Press, 1982. [37] B. J´onsson and A. Tarski. Boolean algebras with operators. Part I. American Journal of Mathematics,
73(4):891­939, 1951. [38] C. Kupke, A. Kurz, and Y. Venema. Stone coalgebras. Theoretical Computer Science, 327(1):109­134,
2004. [39] C. Kupke and D. Pattinson. Coalgebraic semantics of modal logics: An overview. Theoretical Computer
Science, 412(38):5070­5094, 2011. CMCS Tenth Anniversary Meeting. [40] D. Lewis. Counterfactuals. Harvard University Press, 1973. [41] J. C. C. McKinsey and A. Tarski. The algebra of topology. Annals of Mathematics, 45:141­191, 1944. [42] R. Montague. Universal grammar. Theoria, 36(3):373­398, 1970. [43] E. Pacuit. Neighborhood Semantics for Modal Logic. Short Textbooks in Logic. Springer, Cham, 2017. [44] H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski. The Mathematics of Metamathematics. Monografie Matematyczne, Tom 41.
Pan´stwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1963. [45] J. J. M. M. Rutten. Universal coalgebra: a theory of systems. Theoretical Computer Science, 249(1):3­80,
2000. [46] G. Sambin and V. Vaccaro. A new proof of Sahlqvist's theorem on modal definability and completeness.
The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 54(3):992­999, 1989. [47] D. Scott. Advice in modal logic. In K. Lambert, editor, Philosophical Problems in Logic, pages 143­173.
Springer, 1970. [48] D. Scott and A. Tarski. The sentential calculus with infinitely long expressions. Colloquium Mathematicum,
16:166­170, 1958. [49] B. Stadler, P. Stadler, M. Shpak, and G. Wagner. Recombination spaces, metrics, and pretopologies.
Zeitschrift fu¨r physikalische Chemie, 216(2):217­234, 2002. [50] M. H. Stone. The theory of representations for Boolean algebras. Transactions of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 40:37­111, 1936. [51] Y. Tanaka. Duality for -additive complete atomic modal algebras. Algebra universalis, 82(31), 2021. [52] A. Tarski. Zur Grundlegung der Boole'schen Algebra. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 24:177­198, 1935. [53] A. Tarski. Remarks on predicate logic with infinitely long expressions. Colloquium Mathematicum,
16:171­176, 1958. [54] P. Taylor. Subspaces in abstract Stone duality. Theory and Applications of Categories, 10(13):301­368,
2002. [55] S. K. Thomason. Categories of frames for modal logic. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 40(3), 1975. [56] E. Cech, Z. Frol´ik, and M. Katetov. Topological Spaces. Interscience Publishers, A division of John Wiley
& Sons, London, New York, Sydney, 1966.

A COALGEBRAIC APPROACH TO DUALITIES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD FRAMES

37

[57] Y. Venema. Algebras and coalgebras. In P. Blackburn, J. Van Benthem, and F. Wolter, editors, Handbook of Modal Logic, volume 3 of Studies in Logic and Practical Reasoning, pages 331­426. Elsevier, 2007.
[58] S. Willard. General Topology. Addison-Wesley series in mathematics. Dover Publications, 2004.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License. To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second St, Suite 300, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA, or Eisenacher Strasse 2, 10777 Berlin, Germany

