JOSEPHSON TRAVELING WAVE PARAMETRIC AMPLIFIERS AS NON-CLASSICAL LIGHT SOURCE FOR MICROWAVE QUANTUM ILLUMINATION

Luca Fasolo a,b, Angelo Grecoa,b, Emanuele Enricob, Fabrizio Illuminatic, Rosario Lo Francod, David Vitalie, Patrizia Livrerid,f,*

a Polytechnic of Torino, Electronic and Telecommunication Department, I-10129 Torino, Italy. b INRiM, Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica, I-10135 Torino, Italy.
c University of Salerno, Department of Industrial Engineering, I-84084, Fisciano (SA), Italy. d University of Palermo, Department of Engineering, I-90128, Palermo, Italy.
e University of Camerino, Physics Division, School of Science and Technology, I-62032, Camerino (MC), Italy. f CNIT, Interuniversity Consortium for Telecommunication, I-56124, Pisa, Italy.
* Corresponding author: patrizia.livreri@unipa.it

Abstract Detection of low-reflectivity objects can be enriched via the so-called quantum illumination procedure. In order that this quantum procedure outperforms classical detection protocols, entangled states of microwave radiation are initially required. In this paper, we discuss the role of Josephson Traveling Wave Parametric Amplifiers (JTWPAs), based on circuit-QED components, as suitable sources of a two-mode squeezed vacuum state, a special signal-idler entangled state. The obtained wide bandwidth makes the JTWPA an ideal candidate for generating quantum radiation in quantum metrology and information processing applications.

where  =  /(4 ) is the classical error rate, is the







reflectance of the transmitted signal on the return path when

the target is present, and NB is the number of background thermal photons with the same frequency of the detecting

signal.

Differently, exploiting a quantum light source, the error

detection probability can be derived from the so-called

Chernoff bound [3]:

  [-  ]/2 

(2)







Keywords: Microwave Quantum Illumination, Josephson Traveling Wave Parametric Amplifiers, Entangled Quantum States, Detection Probability Improvement.

1. INTRODUCTION

Quantum illumination (QI) is a sensing technique,

introduced by S. Lloyd [1] and perfected by S. H. Tan et al.

[2] in 2008, which exploits quantum entanglement between

photons to enhance the detection of low-reflectivity objects

immersed in a bright thermal background.

Unlike most of the applications that exploit the quantum

properties of matter, such as quantum computing, quantum

communication, and quantum cryptography, this detection

protocol is superior to its classical counterpart in the

presence of noise and decoherence sources. It has been

demonstrated [2] that, for a given number NS of photon composing the detecting signal, in the presence of very low

signal to noise ratios (SNR  0.01), this procedure ensures

a reduction of 6 dB in the error detection probability (Pe) exponent, compared to state-of-the-art classical detection

protocol based on coherent light emission from laser or

maser, and homodyne detection. In the framework of

repeated interrogations with  independendent pulses and

being >> 1, it can be demonstrated that with a classical

light, it occurs:

  [-  ]/2 

(1)







Fig.1: Schematic representation of the quantum illumination protocol

where  =  / is the quantum error rate and (2) can





be experimentally approached exploiting a two-mode

squeezed vacuum state (TMSV), which is the optimal in the

case of asymmetric discrimination [4] non-classical light

sources, and by a proper detection protocol, implementing

for example a FeedForward-Sum-Frequency Generation

FF-SFG mechanism [5].

From (1) and (2) it can be noted that, for a given NS, an increase of NB (i.e, a reduction of the SNR) increases the error detection probability in both the protocols, but with a

slower rate in the case of the quantum one. This means that

the advantage of the quantum protocol with respect to the

classical one increases with the reduction of the SNR.

A schematic representation of the quantum illumination protocol is presented in Fig.1. A bi-modal quantum state | > of entangled photons, called respectively signal and

idler, is prepared in the transmitter. The signal mode of this state is sent to the target while the idler mode is temporarily retained at the source. After a certain travel time, the signal mode is partially reflected by the target in the direction of the receiver. Here a joint detection of the reflected signal mode, immersed in the background thermal noise, and of the idler mode is performed. Analysing the correlation between the two photons, now disentangled, one can discriminate between presence or absence of the target.

This general measurement scheme was experimentally tested in the optical range for the first time in 2013 [6] exploiting a beta-barium borate (BBO) non-linear crystal pumped with a laser as source of entangled states and a CCD camera for correlation measurements as a receiver. The measurement scheme was further improved in 2014 [7]. Being the background noise in the optical regime usually negligible, the advantage of the quantum protocol was demonstrated purposely adding an artificial source of noise.
On the contrary, in the microwave regime, the low level SNR condition is naturally realized in a room-temperature environment, making the quantum illumination protocol an essential tool for low-power short-range detection in this spectral region. A first implementation of Microwave Quantum Illumination (MQI), also known as quantum radar, was proposed for the first time in 2015 [8], exploiting an electro-opto-mechanical (EOM) converter to entangle microwave signal and optical idler fields. The microwave radiation collected from the target was then phase-conjugated and upconverted by another EOM into an optical field for a joint-photodetection at visible wavelengths, a range for which extremely efficient detectors are already available.

It has been proposed and verified [8,9] that the loss of detection efficiency due to the exploitation of the low-quality entangled microwave modes produced by an EOM could be overcome by the use of quantum sources based on Josephson Parametric converter with quantum-limited noise. In 2020 [10], exploiting a Josephson Ring modulator-based source for the MQI and a digital post-processing of the heterodyne revealed signal and idler photons, the detection at room temperature of an object one meter distant from the source was demonstrated (see also [11] where a JPC source was used and compared to a classical noise radar).
A schematic representation of a MQI experimental setup that exploits a Josephson metamaterial as a source of non-classical light is reported in Fig.2. The device is hosted inside a cryostat and feeded with a pump tone generated at room temperature, opportuneously filtered and attenuated. The generated TMSV state is then amplified, both at cryogenic and room temperature, before being splitted. The idler tone is directly sent to the correlation measurement system while the detecting signal is sent in the direction of the target by means of an antenna. The reflected signal, mixed with the background noise, is picked up with a second antenna, amplified and sent to the measurement system.

Fig.2: (a) Schematic representation of a MQI protocol that exploits a Josephson metamaterial, hosted in a cryogenic environment, as a source of two-mode squeezed vacuum states for the detection of low-reflectivity targets at room temperature. (b) Micrograph of a
typical Josephson Travelling Wave Parametric Amplifier.
The bandwidth of Josephson-based amplifiers or ring modulators is limited by the present technology to tens of megahertz. Much higher bandwidth can be obtained using superconducting metamaterials such as Josephson Traveling Wave Parametric Amplifiers (JTWPA), which achieve bandwidths of several GHz with reasonable gain at the expense of noise figure. [12].
In this context, one can observe that the number of independent pulses  emitted by a light source depends on its bandwidth  and the total integration time  via the simple relation  = .
It is trivial to appreciate how both classical and quantum detection probabilities depend exponentially by the bandwidth of the light-source. In the following, the bandwidth in which JTWPAs squeeze their output fields and the corresponding capability to generate TMSV states will be discussed.

2. JOSEPHSON TRAVELING WAVE PARAMETRIC AMPLIFIER

The Josephson Traveling Wave Parametric Amplifiers (JTWPAs) are on-chip engineered superconducting nonlinear metamaterials for the microwave regime, composed by the repetition of several Josephson junctions (JJs) embedded in a coplanar waveguide. These latter constitute a uniqueness in the solid state physics, being the only known non dissipative nonlinear passive elements. In the context of MQI, these materials can play the same role, as a source of non-classical light, played by the nonlinear crystals in the QI. Indeed, inside these artificial structures the microwave tones can propagate and exchange energy with other tones thanks to intermodulation energypreserving phenomena, generating entangled quantum states.
The quantum states generated by generic JTWPAs acting as three-wave or four-wave mixers have been extensively investigated [11,13,14,15]. Both working regimes and relative theoretical approaches promote, via parametric amplification, a two-mode squeezed vacuum state | > thanks to the non-degenerate spontaneous

parametric down-conversion of a pump photon



| >


=



1  ()

(  ())|> |>
 

(3)

=0

Here, the two-mode squeezed vacuum state is expressed in the Fock-state basis of the signal and idler output fields. The parameter  is the modulus of the so-called squeezing parameter and it is a quantity that can be expressed as a function both of the characteristics of the components of the metamaterial and of the frequency, thanks to a circuit-Quantum ElectroDynamics (c-QED) description of the system [15].

The squeezing of the two quadratures qj and pj

 =  +  ,







(4)

 =  ( -  )







of a TMSV state generated by a JTWPA with two different values of  (0. 5 and 1. 5) are reported in Fig. 3 (respectively (a-b) and (c-d)) in terms of the associated Wigner

distributions. Here,  and  represent the bosonic





creation and annihilation operators for the j-th tone.

It has been experimentally demonstrated how the

squeezing parameter  in JTWPA can reach values up to ~ 3,

corresponding to a gain  of about 20 dB [16]. With this in

hand, the squeezing capabilities can thus be estimated

considering the squeezing spectrum  [15,17] in all the

bandwidth

Fig. 4 (a) shows the squeezing parameter for three

different experimental conditions, which lead to different 

MAX in the center of the bandwidth, while Fig. 4 (b) shows the corresponding . From the plot it is clear that the higher

the squeezing parameter the more intense the squeezing will

be. The squeezing between two quadratures in the low gain

case (= 0.5 - 1.5, corresponding to  = 7.2 dB - 1.1 dB) can

be appreciated in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 (b).

Fig.4:(a) modulus of the squeezing parameter  and (b) squeezing spectrum S as a function of the signal frequency  . The apical

values of  for the three curves are 0.5 (red), 1.5 (blue) and 3 (green), leading to a maximum squeezing magnitude of
respectively -4.5 dB, -13.2 dB and -26.5 dB. All the curves have been calculated following the model in [15] and supposing a pump
frequency of 12 GHz.

Fig.3: Wigner distributions of the TMSV states for different values of the squeezing parameter. In (a) and (b)  = 0. 5while in (c) and
(d)  = 1. 5

4. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we discussed the role of a JTWPA as an experimental source in the quantum metrology scenario of quantum illumination. In particular, we focused on

quantifying its effect on the vacuum state. It emerges that, by suitably controlling the parameters of the device, a broadband two-mode squeezed vacuum state can be generated. This latter can be exploited as a broadband detecting signal that can exponentially increase the performances of MQI protocol, thus making JTWPAs optimal candidate as entangled radiation sources for quantum-enhanced detection of objects in the microwave regime. As a prospect, utilization of these entanglement sources together with manipulation of photon spatial indistinguishability [18], may be strategic for further gains in the detection efficiency against background noise.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research has been supported by DARTWARS, a project funded by Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN, National Scientific Committee 5), by MUR (Ministero dell'Università e della Ricerca) via the project PRIN 2017 "Taming complexity via QUantum Strategies: a Hybrid Integrated Photonic approach" (QUSHIP) Id. 2017SRNBRK, by the SUPERGALAX project in the framework of the European Union (EU) Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (H2020, FETOPEN-2018-2020 call), and by the Joint Research Project PARAWAVE of the European Metrology Programme for Innovation and Research (EMPIR). This project (PARAWAVE) received funding from the EMPIR programme co-financed by the Participating States and from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Lloyd, Enhanced sensitivity of photodetection via quantum

illumination. Science,Science 321, 1463-1465 (2008).

[2] S.-H. Tan, B. I. Erkmen, V. Giovannetti, S. Guha, S. Loyd, L.

Maccone, S. Pirandola, and J. H. Shapiro, Quantum

illumination with Gaussian States, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,

253601 (2008).

[3] F. Nielsen, An Information-Geometric Characterization of

Chernoff Information, IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 20, 3,

(2013).

[4] G. De Palma, J Borregard, Minimum error probability of

quantum illumination, Phys. Rev. A, 98, 012101 (2018).

[5] Q. Zhuang, Z. Zhang, and J. H. Shapiro, Optimum

Mixed-State

Discrimination

for

Noisy

Entanglement-Enhanced Sensing, Phys. Rev. Lett, 118,

040801 (2017)

[6] E. D. Lopaeva, I. Ruo Berchera, I. P. Degiovanni, S.

Olivares, G. Brida, M. Genovese, Experimental realization of

quantum illumination. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 153603 (2013).

[7] Z. Zhang, S. Mouradian, F. N. C. Wong, J. H. Shapiro,

Entanglement-enhanced sensing in a lossy and noisy

environment. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 110506 (2015).

[8] S. Barzanjeh, S. Guha, C. Weedbrook, D. Vitali, J. H.

Shapiro, S. Pirandola, Microwave quantum illumination.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 080503 (2015).

[9] S. Barzanjeh, S. Pirandola, D. Vitali, J. M. Fink, Microwave

quantum illumination using a digital receiver. Sci. Adv. 6,

eabb0451 (2020).

[10] S. Barzanjeh, S. Pirandola, D. Vitali, J. M. Fink, Microwave

quantum illumination with a digital phase-conjugated

receiver. IEEE National Radar Conference - Proceedings,

2020, 2020-September, 9266397.

[11] D. Luong, C. W. Sandbo Chang A. M. Vadiraj, A. Damini, C.

M. Wilson, B. Balaji, Receiver Operating Characteristics for

a Prototype Quantum Two-Mode Squeezing Radar, IEEE

Transaction on Aerospace and Electronic Systems VOL. 56,

NO. 3 JUNE 2020.

[12] A. L. Grimsmo, and A. Blais, Squeezing and quantum state

engineering with Josephson traveling wave amplifiers, Nat.

Partn. Journals Quantum Inf. 20 (2017).

[13] T. H. A. van der Reep, Mesoscopic Hamiltonian for

Josephson travelling-wave parametric amplifiers. Phys. Rev.

A 99, 063838 (2019).

[14]

L.Fasolo, A. Greco, E.Enrico, Superconducting

Josephson-Based Metamaterials for Quantum-Limited

Parametric Amplification: a Review. Advances in

Condensed-Matter Physics - Rudimentary Research to

Topical Technology, Intech-Open (2020).

[15] A. Greco, L. Fasolo, A. Meda, L. Callegaro, and E. Enrico, A

quantum model for rf-SQUIDs based metamaterials enabling

3WM and 4WM Travelling Wave Parametric Amplification.

Preprint at arXiv:2009.01002 [cond-mat.supr-con].

[16] C. Macklin, K. O'Brien, D. Hover,M. E. Schwartz, V.

Bolkhovsky, X. Zhang, I. Siddiqi, A near ­ quantum-limited

Josephson traveling-wave parametric amplifier, Science,

350, (6258), 307. (2015)

[17] Waltraut Wustmann and Vitaly Shumeiko, Parametric

resonance in tunable superconducting cavities, Phys. Rev. B

87, 184501 (2013)

[18] M. Piccolini, F. Nosrati, G. Compagno, P. Livreri, R.

Morandotti and R. Lo Franco, Entanglement robustness via

spatial deformation of identical particle wave functions,

Preprint at arXiv:2104.09714 [quant-ph].

