arXiv:2106.01337v1 [physics.ed-ph] 31 May 2021

Problem of the 8-th Experimental Physics Olympiad, Skopje, 8 May 2021 Determination of Planck constant by LED
Todor M. Mishonov, Aleksander P. Petkov, Matteo Andreoni, Emil G. Petkov, Albert M. Varonov Georgi Nadjakov Institute of Solid State Physics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 72 Tzarigradsko Chaussee Blvd., BG-1784 Sofia, Bulgaria
Iglika M. Dimitrova Faculty of Chemical Technologies, Department of Physical Chemistry, University of Chemical Technology and Metallurgy, 8 Kliment Ohridski Blvd., BG-1756 Sofia and Georgi Nadjakov Institute of Solid State Physics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
72 Tzarigradsko Chaussee Blvd., BG-1784 Sofia, Bulgaria
Leonora Velkoska and Riste Popeski-Dimovski Institute of Physics, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, "Ss. Cyril and Methodius" University, Skopje, R. N. Macedonia
(Dated: May 31, 19:59)
This is the problem of the 8th International Experimental Physics Olympiad (EPO). The task of the EPO8 is to determine Plank constant = h/2 using the given set-up with LED. If you have an idea how to do it, do it and send us the result; skip the reading of the detailed step by step instructions with increasing difficulties. We expect the participants to follow the suggested items ­ they are instructive for physics education in general. Only the reading of historical remarks given in the first section can be omitted during the Olympiad without loss of generality. Participants should try solving as much tasks as they can without paying attention to the age categories: give your best.
I. EPO ­ A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE. SKIP THIS SECTION DURING THE OLYMPIAD
From its very beginning, the Experimental Physics Olympiad (EPO) is worldwide known; all Olympiad problems have been published in Internet1­7 and from the very beginning there were 120 participants. In the last years highschool students from more than 10 countries participated and the distance between the most distant cities is more than 4 Mm.
Let us describe the main differences between EPO and other similar competitions.
· Each participant in EPO receives as a gift from the organizers the set-up, which one worked with. In such a way, after the Olympiad has finished, even bad performed participant is able to repeat the experiment and reach the level of the champion. In this way, the Olympiad directly affects the teaching level in the whole world. After the end of the school year, the set-up remains in the school, where the participant has studied.
· Each of the problems is original and is connected to fundamental physics or the understanding of the operation of a technical patent.
· The Olympic idea is realized in EPO in its initial from and everyone willing to participate from around the world can do that. There is no limit in the participants number. On the other hand, the similarity with other Olympiads is that the problems are direct illustration of the study material and alongside with other similar competitions mitigates the secondary education degradation, which is a world tendency.
· One and the same experimental set-up is given to all participants but the tasks are different for the different age groups, the same as the swimming pool water is equally wet for all age groups in a swimming competition.
· One of the most important goals of the Olympiad is the student to repeat the experiment at home and to analyze the theory necessary for the understanding. In this way any even badly performed motivated participant has the possibility to be introduced to the corresponding physics field, even though there is no physics classroom in his/her school, even though the physics education in his/her country to be deliberately destroyed.
We will briefly mention the problems of former 7 EPOs: 1) The setup of EPO11 was actually a student version of the American patent for auto-zero and chopper stabilized direct current amplifiers. It was notable that many students were able to understand the operation of an American patent without special preparation.8 2) The problem of EPO22 was to measure Planck constant by diffraction of a LED light by a compact disk. 3) A contemporary realization of the assigned to NASA patent for the use of negative impedance converter for generation of voltage oscillations was the set-up of EPO3.3 4) EPO44 was devoted to the fundamental physics ­ to determine the speed of light by measuring

2
electric and magnetic forces. The innovative element was the application of the catastrophe theory in the analysis of the stability of a pendulum. 5) The topic of the EPO55 was to measure the Boltzmann constant kB following the Einstein idea of study thermal fluctuations of electric voltage of a capacitor. 6) The EPO66 problem can be considered as a continuation of the previous Olympiad. With a similar electronic circuit Schottky noise is measured and his idea for the determination of the electron charge is realized. 7) The EPO77 problem was to measure a large inductance made by a general impedance converter by the Maxwell-Wien bridge. Each problem given at EPO can be considered as a dissertation in methodology of physics education.
In short, the established traditions is a balance between contemporary working technical inventions and fundamental physics.
The EPO problems are meant for high school and university students but are posed by teachers with co authorship with colleagues working in universities or scientific institutes. For colleagues interested in new author's problems for the needs of the contemporary physics education we share our experience in the description of the experimental set-ups described at a university level. These are for instance:
1) The determination of the Planck constant without light but only with electronic processes study;9 this set-up requires the usage of an oscilloscope but in some countries the oscilloscopes are available in in the high schools physics labs and the prices of the former is constantly going down.
2) The speed of the light without the usage of scales or high frequency equipment is another innovative set-up10 for high school education. And the idea for this experiment is given by our teacher in electrodynamics Maxwell.
3) In the physics curriculum in all countries it is mentioned that the temperature is a measure of average kinetic energy of the gas molecules but the Boltzmann constant kB that gives the relation between energy and temperature is not measured in high school and even rarely in the best universities. The experimental set-up for kB by the method proposed by Einstein (the EPO5 problem) is described11 as a set-up for university school lab exercise in a impact factor journal. But what larger impact an experimental set-up that is used by high school students from Kazakhstan and Macedonia and the surrounding countries can have. More than 100 set-ups were distributed around the world.
4) Similar thoughts can be expressed for the electron charge qe. This fundamental constant is also mentioned in the high school education as a humanitarian incantation but is not measured. We broke this tradition and described an experimental set-up (from EPO6) in the European Journal of Physics.12 This set-up can be built for a week in every high school. The Schottky idea for determination of the electron charge by measuring voltage fluctuations is used. From the idea to the realization more than 100 years have passed and one of the reasons is that in many countries the largest enemy of the education is the ministry of education.
The development of some set-ups required additional study of circuits with operational amplifiers (OpAmps). This led to introduction of the master equation of OpAms applied to the stability of circuits with Negative Impedance Converter (NIC),13 Generalized Impedance Converter14 and study of Probability Distribution Function15 of the crossover frequency of OpAmps.
The mission of the physics teachers in the worldwide progress is evident ­ precisely our science reshaped the world in the last century. Successful innovative EPO set-ups after some update can be manufactured by companies specialized in production of educational equipment like TeachSpin16 and PHYWE17 for instance.
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP AND THE CONDITIONS FOR ONLINE PARTICIPANTS
The set-up you received is represented in the Fig. 1. Ones again we repeat the condition that the room in which you work can be darken by dense curtains, for example. The details which every participant has to ensure are depicted in Fig. 2. In the next sections different tasks with increasing difficulty are described in the sections corresponding to every age category. The jury will looks at the experimental data, tables and graphics. It is not necessary to write the humanitarian text between them, only mark the number of the corresponding task. We wish you success.
III. TASKS S. GETTING TO KNOW THE VOLTAGE SOURCE
1. Turn on the multimeter as an Ohm-meter (). With maximum accuracy measure the 2 soldered resistors to the triple AA battery holder and write down the results. What is the resistance r+ and r- of the resistors at the (+) and (-) ends of the 3 battery holder? Calculate r = r+ + r-.
2. What is the resistance RLR between the left and right ends of the potentiometer?
3. Measure the resistance of the potentiometer between the middle terminal and one of the others. In what interval does the resistance change when you rotate its axis (Rmin, Rmax)?

3

FIG. 1: Details of the set-up given to the participants: 1 small plastic bag containing 8 light emitting diodes (LED), 1 paper clip and 2 small rubber rings, 1 potentiometer, 1 piece of black plastic straw, 3 metal binder clips, 1 battery holder for 3 AA-type batteries, 1 double sided adhesive tape, 1 compact disk (CD), 7 connecting crocodile cables, 1 torch with battery holder taken
out, 5 bands of 6 differently colored sticky labels.

FIG. 2: Details which every participant have to ensure himself: computer with Internet connection, mobile phone, a camera or a scanner to create a PDF or picture file of your paper work during the Olympiad. Additionally: 1) 2 multimeters with original connecting cables, 2) 3 AA type batteries of 1.5 V, 3) 3 AAA type batteries of 1.5 V, 4) pen(s) and a plastic ruler, 5) 2 (or 1 if height of cube >6 cm) paper cubes 8×8 cm 6) scissors, 7) at least 2 sheets of millimeter paper or squared paper sheets and 4 white sheets of ordinary A4 paper, 8) 2 sheets of A4 white paper with 240 g/m2 or larger thickness, 9) calculator (not shown here and highly recommended :-) , 10) pad for A4 paper (recommended), 11) pencil, rubber eraser, white band eraser (recommended), *) sandwiches and bottle of water (strongly recommended). 0) Nothing excessive on the cleaned working table
and the room has to be darkened.

4. Turn on the multimeter as a DCV and measure the voltages of your 1.5 V AA batteries. Order them if they are different E1  E2  E3.

5. Put the batteries at battery holder and measure the total electromotive force E. What is the accuracy of the relation E = E1 + E2 + E3?

6.

Calculate

how

many

mV

is

the

difference

between

1 2

V

and

1 3

V?

7. Using crocodile cables, battery holder, potentiometer and voltmeter connect the voltage source circuit depicted
in Fig. 3. Determine the the interval in which the voltage measured by the voltmeter changes UV  (0, Umax) when you rotate the axis of the potentiometer (ensure UV > 0). You can use a piece of double side adhesive band to fix the potentiometer on the pad.

8. Using the circuit from Fig. 3, connect two additional crocodile cables to the middle terminal of the potentiometer and the ground point of the circuit, leaving the other connectors of the two cables open. In such a way the voltmeter shows the voltage applied to the LED U = UV.

9. Note that light-emitting diodes (LED) have terminals with different lengths; the longer (anode) has to be connected to positive voltage. Connect the open ends of the two cables to one of the LEDs, following Fig. 4. Do you see the similarities and difference between in the connections in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4?

10. Turn on the voltage source until the connected LED begins emitting clear visible light. Make a table with 3 columns, column 1 is the sequential number of the LED, column 2 is its color, column 3 is U  the smallest

4

+ E3
- + E2 - + E1 -

r+
V r-

Rpot

+ E
-

r

V

Rpot

FIG. 3: Left. Detailed circuit with: battery holder with 3 AA type batteries, two resistors, potentiometer, and voltmeter. Connecting 4 cables are given by red color and crocodiles clips are marked by points (dots). Right. Schematic representation of the same circuit: voltage source with electromotive voltage E = E1 + E2 + E3 and sequential internal resistor r = r- + r+ corresponding to the battery holder with the 3 AA type batteries inserted in, potentiometer with resistance Rpot, and voltmeter.

r+

+ E

Rpot

-

r-

VD

FIG. 4: LED connected to the voltage source from Fig. 3, circuit for measuring the voltage U  at which the LED emits the weakest evanescent light.

voltage at which the LED emits light. From now on you have to keep the enumeration and order of the LEDs, you can use the colored sticky labels for that but make sure you can easily remove the labels if necessary.
11. Now it is good to darken the room. Put the connected LED into the one end of the plastic straw. Measure U  by carefully rotating the handle of the potentiometer and visually observing with your eye through the other end of the plastic straw when the LED begins emitting light (the plastic straw is a waveguide for the LED light). We recommend at least 5 different measurements and taking the median (or middle) value for U . In this way determine U  for all available and working LEDs and fill column 3 of the table. The human eye is a very good sensor however the results are subjective.

IV. TASKS M. DIFFRACTION OF LED LIGHT
The purpose of this set of tasks is to measure the the wavelength  and the frequency of the light  = c/ of every LED; where c  300 Mm/s is the speed of light. For diffraction grating we will use Compact Disk (CD) with constant d = 1600 nm.
12. Cut a 8×8 cm square piece of cardboard or thicker paper. Using the double adhesive tape carefully stick all measured LEDs in 11 on this square piece as shown in Fig. 5 and enumerate them according to 10. It is better

FIG. 5: Square piece with 8 LED stuck by double sided adhesive tape. Enumerate each LED and write a small (+) sign close to the number to mark the anode of LED. The terminals are bent in vertical direction in order to be bitten by crocodiles :-).

5
the ends of the diodes to be bent vertically in order to be connected by crocodile cables easier. For further convenience, try using one and the same orientation of the terminals, or mark with (+) on the cardboard the longer terminal. If you cannot accomplish this item, you can still solve the whole problem, therefore proceed to the next tasks. 13. Now you need a diffraction grating. In order to obtain it you have to remove the metallic foil layer from the CD as it is described in Fig. 6.
FIG. 6: The technology of peeling the foil of the compact disk: 1) The foil is scratched radially with the paper clip. 2) A piece of the adhesive tape is stuck on the scratch. 3) Then the piece is pulled and the foil stuck on the tape is removed from the CD. 4) Repeat steps 2) and 3) above (or near) the edges of the remaining foil until about half part of the disc is peeled from the
foil as a half Moon at the right. You can use both sides of the double adhesive band.
14. Put the 3 AAA type batteries in the torch battery holder, assemble the torch, turn it on and focus it at infinity (make the beam as narrow as possible). You have almost parallel beam of white light. Using the different halves of the disk, you can observe a spectrum of the torch white LED at reflection and transmission. In order to observe spectrum at transmission, the light from the torch has to pass through the peeled half of the disc and fall on a blank sheet of paper. The sheet of paper and the CD have to be parallel and we recommend the distance between them D to be approximately 15 cm. Try obtaining central maximum and two horizontal spectra with the torch; this is the initial exercise to the more difficult task with the set of LEDs.
15. Take out the lens from the torch as shown in Fig. 7 .
FIG. 7: Torch with lens: carefully unscrew the part holding the lens to the torch, disassemble it and take out the lens.
16. Fix the lens at the top of 1 metal binder clip with rubber rings as it is shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Stick (highly recommended) the binder clip with the lens on the pad (or table) with a piece of double sided adhesive tape.
17. Use the paper cubes (or cube) and adjust the height approximately equal to the height of the lens on the binder clip.
18. Place the 8×8 cm squared piece with LEDs made in 12 on the cubes, bring them together near the lens, so that one of the LEDs to face the lens and be at close distance behind it as shown in both Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. You can use books instead of the paper cubes but height change is more difficult.
19. Put the CD in the second metal binder clip and place it after the lens as shown in both Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. The binder clip with the lens must be between the diodes and the binder clip with the CD.
20. Put the cardboard box with a normal sheet of paper or the thicker sheet of paper in the third metal binder clip. This is your screen.
21. Carefully arrange the diodes, binder clip with lens, binder clips with CD and screen as shown in both Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Screen, CD and lens should be parallel to each other and perpendicular to the direction of propagation of light It is best to use the periphery of the CD for the diffraction region.

6
FIG. 8: Scheme of the setup shown on Fig. 9. The LED is connected with wires to the voltage supply source using crocodile clips. A photon from the collimated light has momentum p = h/, which is perpendicular to the CD. The photon obtains momentum p0 = h/d in direction perpendicular to the direction of the tracks of the CD, and for the diffraction angle  we have tan  = p0/p. D is the distance between the screen and the CD, and L is the distance between the central and the first
diffraction maximum; tan  = L/D. The binder clips, which hold the lens and the CD, are drawn schematically, too.
FIG. 9: Experimental set-up for measuring the wavelength of LED light. The red LED is connected with the connecting cables to the voltage supply source. The light is collimated with the lens then it passes through the tracks of the transparent compact disk and one can see a bright image of the LED on the screen. Together with the central maximum two pale diffraction maximums can be observed on the screen. Diffraction angles are different for the different colors from the set. The wavelength
 of the light can be determined by measuring the diffraction angles . 22. Use the voltage source and apply E to one of the red LED and place it behind the lens. Make additional
adjustments in the arrangement until you see the bright central maximum and pale diffraction maximums on your screen as in Fig. 9. The focus distance is very small and putting the LED close to the lens you can see the real image of the lighting part of the led on the screen. The method for adjusting of the set-up is individual, we recommend all details to be on the paper pad where with pen you can mark the place of every detail which can be easily returned in the same place after removal. 23. Try to make fine tuning of the set-up slightly rotating or moving the screen and/or CD. Additionally adjust the height of the square piece with LEDs if necessary. The distances between central maximum and left Ll and right one Lr should be approximately equal and approximately on a horizontal line. Experimentally the mean

7

value

L

=

1 2

(Ll

+

Lr)

can

be

determined

as

half

of

the

distance

between

the

diffraction

maximums.

24. For all of LEDs you have to measure L and the distance D between the screen and CD, which is better to be kept constant for each LED with the adhesive tape. Then we can calculate sine of the diffraction angle  = arctan(L/D) using the distances sin  = L/ L2 + D2 = sin(arctan(L/D)). The wavelength then is given by the well-known formula

 = d sin .

(1)

Now you can calculate the frequency  = c/ = 1/T and the period T of the oscillations.

25. The determination of the frequency of light of all LEDs is the main goal of the optical part of the task. We recommend the measured and calculated data for all diodes to be represented in Table I.

# color 1 ... ... ...

D [mm] L [mm] sin()  [deg]  [nm]  [THz] qeU  [10-19 J]

...

...

... ...

...

...

...

...

...

... ...

...

...

...

TABLE I: Table for arranging the measured results from the LED diffraction patterns. We recommend not to draw the vertical lines of the table since they quite often make it unusable.

26. Now you can address the main goal of the Olympiad ­ the determination of Planck constant h. Using the electron charge qe = 1.60 × 10-19 C complete the last column of Table I by calculating the energies qeU  for all LEDs, using the results from item 11. Those energies are related to photon energies by the equation

h = qeU  + A.

(2)

Our estimation for Planck constant h is based on the approximation that the parameter A is weakly dependent of the chemical compound of the LED semiconductor therefore is almost constant.

27. Consider carefully the range of variables, the used units and their powers. Mark in a graphic plot of millimeter paper: (x) in the abscissa the frequencies of the LED and (y) along the ordinate axis the energies qeU . You can use, for example, THz and 10-19 J. In this (, qeU ) plot place the points corresponding to all measured LEDs. For each point write down the number according to the table in item 11.

28. Perform linear regression of these points (draw a straight line which passes closest to all points according to you). It is allowed to ignore a point if it deviates too much from the others and if you do it, write it down explicitly. If you perform the linear regression with a programmed calculator, additionally write down the correlation coefficient of the linear regression.

29. On the straight line choose two points (A) and (B) and write down their coordinates: energies EA and EB and frequencies A and B. Calculate the differences E  EB - EA and   B - A.
30. Calculate the ratio hLED  E/. This is your evaluation of the Planck constant. At correct solution of the problem you will obtain at least the correct order.

31. Calculate the ratio X  hLED/h between the measured by you with the present set-up value and the well-known value h = 6.62 × 10-34 J/Hz. Calculate also = 100 (X - 1), which is roughly speaking the error in percents. For some purposes is more convenient to use frequency  = 2. In this case  h/2 = 1.054 × 10-34 Js is introduced and h = .

V. TASKS L. CURRENT VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS OF LED
32. Choose one of your multimeters to work as an ammeter, and the other to work as a voltmeter. Then measure the internal resistance of the ammeter RA at its smallest current range.
33. To study the current voltage characteristics I(U ) or I-V curves of the LEDs, connect the circuit from Fig. 10.
34. We recommend to start with a red LED and sequentially study the others from the set. The ammeter measures the current IA through the LED I, i.e. I = IA. The voltmeter shows voltage UV and the voltage at the LED is U = UV - RAI.

8

r+

+ E

Rpot

-

r-

A

V

D

FIG. 10: Circuit for study current-voltage characteristics. Adjustable voltage regulator with potentiometer for voltage supplying to the LEDs and for investigation of I(U ). The voltage from the battery holder is applied to the potentiometer. The LED is connected to the middle terminal and to one of the other terminals of the potentiometer. The ammeter is connected in
series with the LED and the voltmeter is connected in parallel.

35. In this task we focus at small currents in the range I  (0.1, 10) µA. Rotating the axis of the potentiometer you have to look at the ammeter. For each LED you have to record less than 10 current values below and above 1 µA. Observe the voltage values also, if necessary adjust the multi-meter range. Arrange your data in a table similar to Table II

UV [V] ... ...

I [µA] ... ...

TABLE II: Tabulated current voltage characteristics per LED, for each studied LED you need a separate table.

36. Draw the I-V curve on a millimeter or squared paper. Mark in a vertical arrow U  at the abscissa U [V]. Use the approximation of ideal ammeter RA  0 when U  UV.
37. Try to invent a method for determination of U  analyzing only the I-V curves at small currents and illustrate it graphically.

VI. TASKS XL. UNIVERSITY STUDENTS

38. Perform the linear regression of the experimental points in the plot (, qeU ) with a computer (if available) and calculate more precisely hLED and the correlation coefficient. It is allowed to omit an experimental point with explanation of the reasons.

39. If a point has been omitted, compare hLED with the one obtained with all points. Does the omission of a point decreases  and increases the correlation coefficient?
40. Perform the order estimation of the errors in measurement of U . You have at least 5 measurements.

41. Evaluate the error in the measurement of the diffraction angle  and relate to it the wavelength .

42. Evaluate A in eV both from 38 (if available) and from 28.
43. Consider what gives larger uncertainty for the final result inaccuracies in U  and  or the approximation that the band gap parameter -A is the same constant for all LEDs.
44. The use of human eye inserts subjective uncertainties. Invent a numerical method to determine the voltage U  analyzing I-V curves (current-voltage characteristics). Apply polynomial regression in some interval and fit to exponent in another. For example, use quadratic polynomial (parabolic) fit

I = aU 2 + bU + c = a(U - U~ )2 + (c - b2/4a)

(3)

for currents in the interval I  (1, 10) µA and calculate the position of the minimum U~ = -b/2a. Calculate |U~ - U |/U  for the LEDs you study.
45. Compare the obtained U~ from the previous task and U  from 11 for all LEDs. Present the errors between the two types of measurements in percent.

9 VII. PROBLEMS FOR FURTHER WORK AFTER THE OLYMPIAD

46. The price of LEDs is very low. You can order LEDs with marked by the manufacturer wavelength and compare with your determination of the wavelength. We expect 5-10% accuracy. If you find a good LED, please let us know at epo@bgphysics.eu.
47. What accuracy of determination of the wavelength  can be reached if you use lasers?
48. To Table II add 3 additional columns to the right: the correction RAI, the corrected LED voltage U = UV -RAI, and the LED resistance R(U )  U/I in M as is demonstrated in Table III. Compare the minimal resistance

UV [V] ... ...

I [µA] ... ...

RAI [V] ... ...

U [V] ... ...

R [M] ... ...

TABLE III: Complete current voltage characteristics in which finite internal resistance of the ammeter is taken into account.

from the table Rmin with the resistance of the voltmeter RV in the used range.
49. If the current through the LED I is large enough its resistance U/I is very small and much smaller than the voltmeter internal resistance. In this case it is necessary to use the connection depicted at Fig. 11.

V A

FIG. 11: Connection for high current and low LED resistance. In this case U = UV and the current through the LED I = IA - U/RV. When the voltmeter internal resistance is high enough 1/RV  0, the corrections to the current U/RV are
negligible.

50. If laser light falls on a vacuum lamp you can reach the accuracy of the first measurement of the Planck constant h by Millikan.18 Check what the accuracy of the determination of h is in the contemporary university labs.

51. Send to the address of the Olympiad epo@bgphysics.eu your responses, recommendations, criticism and suggestions, which you think would help the EPO9 organizers. Negative impressions are also welcome and will be taken into account.

52. Re-derive and program the solution equations for the parabolic fit of a set of experimental data I = aU 2 +bU +c. Those are conditions for the minimization of the function
N
f (a, b, c)  (aUi2 + bUi + c - Ii)2,
i=1
where summation is on the all N points. The conditions for minimum require the annulation of the first derivatives af = 0, bf = 0, and cf = 0, read
U 2+m a + U 1+m b + U 0+m c = U mI ,

where brackets denote averaging, for example

UmI

=

1 N

N

UimIi,

i=1

Uk

=

1 N

N

Uik ,

k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.

i=1

In such a way we have a system of 3 linear equations, m = 0, 1, 2, for the parameters a, b and c which solutions can be easily programmed and of course it is implemented in many software programs addressed for users.

10
53. Draw the parabolic fit on the plot with experimental data (Ui, Ii) and draw a small circle at the minimum of the parabola U~ = -b/2a. Try to invent a better method for determination of the U  used for determination of Planck constant.
54. Most easily multimeters can be burnt when are used as ammeters. That is why this task can be done after the Olympiad. Every time start with the maximal fused current range. Switch one of multimeters as ammeter and measure the maximal current Imax which can give our voltage source. Can we evaluate the internal resistance of the batteries rbat using Imax = E/(r + RA + 3 rbat)?
VIII. EPILOGUE
EPO8 is held in a very difficult for the whole world conditions. Approximately half of the participants are on-line. The organizers of EPO8 would like to thank everyone who helped in the preparation of this wonderful competition especially the president of the Society of Physicists of Macedonia, Prof. Lambe Barandovski for ensuring on-spot participation in Skopje. We are waiting you at EPO9; next year same time.
 E-mail: epo@bgphysics.eu  Electronic address: ristepd@gmail.com 1 V. G. Yordanov, P. V. Peshev, S. G. Manolev, T. M. Mishonov, "Charging of capacitors with double switch. The principle
of operation of auto-zero and chopper-stabilized DC amplifiers", arXiv:1511.04328 [physics.ed-ph] 2 V. N. Gourev, S. G. Manolev, V. G. Yordanov, T. M. Mishonov, "Measuring Plank constant with colour LEDs and compact
disk", arXiv:1602.06114 [physics.ed-ph]. 3 S. G. Manolev, V. G. Yordanov, N. N. Tomchev, T. M. Mishonov, "Volt-Ampere characteristic of "black box" with a
negative resistance", arXiv:1602.08090 [physics.ed-ph]. 4 V. G. Yordanov, V. N. Gourev, S. G. Manolev, A. M. Varonov, T. M. Mishonov, "Measuring the speed of light with electric
and magnetic pendulum", arXiv:1605.00493 [physics.ed-ph]. 5 T. M. Mishonov, E. G. Petkov, A. A. Stefanov, A P. Petkov, I. M. Dimitrova, S. G. Manolev, S. I. Ilieva, A. M. Varonov,
"Measurement of the Boltzmann constant by Einstein. Problem of the 5-th Experimental Physics Olympiad. Sofia 9 December 2017" arXiv:1801.00022v4 [physics.ed-ph]. 6 T. M. Mishonov, E. G. Petkov, A. A. Stefanov, A. P. Petkov, V. I. Danchev, Z. O. Abdrahim, Z. D. Dimitrov, I. M. Dimitrova, R. Popeski-Dimovski, M. Poposka, S. Nikoli´c, S. Miti´c, R. Rosenauer, F. Schwarzfischer, V. N. Gourev, V. G. Yordanov, A. M. Varonov "Measurement of the electron charge qe using Schottky noise. Problem of the 6-th Experimental Physics Olympiad. Sofia 8 December 2018", arXiv:1703.05224v2 [physics.ed-ph]. 7 T. M. Mishonov, R. Popeski-Dimovsk, L. Velkoska, I. M. Dimitrova, V. N. Gourev, A. P. Petkov, E. G. Petkov, A. M. Varonov, "The Day of the Inductance. Problem of the 7-th Experimental Physics Olympiad, Skopje, 7 December 2019", arXiv:1912.07368 [physics.ed-ph]. 8 E. A. Goldberg, L. Jules, "Stabilized direct current amplifier", Patent US2684999A. 9 D. S. Damyanov, I. N. Pavlova, S. I. Ilieva, V. N. Gourev, V. G. Yordanov and T. M. Mishonov "Planck's constant measurement by Landauer quantization for student laboratories", Eur. J. Phys. 36, 055047 (2015). 10 T. M. Mishonov, A. M. Varonov, D. D. Maksimovski, S. G. Manolev, V. N. Gourev and V. G. Yordanov, "An undergraduate laboratory experiment for measuring 0, µ0 and speed of light c with do-it-yourself catastrophe machines: electrostatic and magnetostatic pendula", Eur. J. Phys. 38, 025203 (2017). 11 T. M. Mishonov, V. N. Gourev, I. M. Dimitrova, N. S. Serafimov, A. A. Stefanov, E. G. Petkov and A. M. Varonov "Determination of the Boltzmann constant by the equipartition theorem for capacitors", Eur. J. Phys. 40, 035102 (2019). 12 T. M. Mishonov, E. G. Petkov, N. Zh. Mihailova, A. A. Stefanov, I. M. Dimitrova, V. N. Gourev, N. S. Serafimov, V. I. Danchev, and A. M. Varonov, "Simple do-it-yourself experimental set-up for electron charge qe measurement", Eur. J. Phys. 39, 065202 (2018). 13 T. M. Mishonov, V. I. Danchev, E. G. Petkov, V. N. Gourev, I. M. Dimitrova, N. S. Serafimov, A. A. Stefanov and A. M. Varonov, "Master equation for operational amplifiers: stability of negative differential converters, crossover frequency and pass-bandwidth", J. Phys. Commun. 3 035004 (2019). 14 T. Mifune, T. M. Mishonov, N. S. Serafimov, I. M. Dimitrova, R. Popeski-Dimovski, L. Velkoska, E. G. Petkov, A. M. Varonov, A. Barone, "Tunable high-Q resonator by general impedance converter", Rev. Sci. Instrum. 92, 025123 (2021). 15 T. M. Mishonov, E. G. Petkov, I. M. Dimitrova, N. S. Serafimov and A. M. Varonov, "Probability distribution function of crossover frequency of operational amplifiers", Measurement 109509 (2021) (in press). 16 Teachspin Inc., https://www.teachspin.com/. 17 PHYWE, https://www.phywe.com/ 18 R. Millikan, `A Direct Photoelectric Determination of Planck's "h" ', Phys. Rev. 7 (3), 355­388 (1916).

Appendix A: Solutions to the EPO8 Problems by the Team from Toronto, Canada

27

