Defect-seeded lateral epitaxy and exfoliation on graphene-terminated surfaces
Sebastian Manzo,1 Patrick J. Strohbeen,1 Zheng-Hui Lim,1 Vivek Saraswat,1 Michael S. Arnold,1 and Jason K. Kawasaki1 1Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706
(Dated: June 3, 2021)
We exploit defects in a 2D barrier layer to drive the seeded lateral epitaxy of atomically smooth, exfoliatable, single-crystalline membranes. This growth mode offers many of the advantages of the recently discovered remote epitaxy, including novel strain relaxation pathways and the ability to exfoliate free-standing membranes, plus additional advantages of (1) tolerance for imperfect graphene/substrate interfaces and (2) the ability to engineer the growth by patterning the 2D graphene layer. We show that GaSb films grow on graphene-terminated GaSb (001) via a seeded lateral epitaxy mechanism, in which pinhole defects in the graphene serve as selective nucleation sites, followed by lateral epitaxy and coalescence into a continuous film. Importantly, the small size of the pinholes permits exfoliation of a continuous, free-standing GaSb membrane. By combining molecular beam epitaxy with in-situ electron diffraction and photoemission, plus ex-situ atomic force microscopy and Raman spectroscopy, we track the graphene defect generation and GaSb growth evolution a few monolayers at a time. Our discovery provides a highly tunable method to engineer single-crystalline 3D materials on precisely tuned 2D barriers.

arXiv:2106.00721v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Jun 2021

I. INTRODUCTION
Remote epitaxy of three-dimensional materials on graphene-terminated surfaces promises to circumvent many of the limitations of conventional epitaxy. For example, the weak van der Waals interaction between the film and graphene creates new strain relaxation pathways for highly mismatched growth [1, 2] and enables mechanical exfoliation of free-standing crystalline membranes for flexible devices [3, 4] and tunign properties via strain in novel geometries [5]. Since the first demonstrations on compound semiconductors [3, 6], epitaxy and exfoliation from graphene have been demonstrated for a variety of other materials including transition metal oxides [4, 7], simple metals [8], halide perovskites [2], and intermetallic compounds [5]. These films are typically thought to grow via a remote epitaxy mechanism, in which epitaxial registry between film and substrate is achieved via remote interactions through the graphene [3, 6].
Here we discover a new growth mode that delivers many of the practical advantages of remote epitaxy, and offers additional advantages of (1) the possibility to engineer the growth mode via patterning of the 2D material barrier and (2) relaxed requirements for cleanliness of the graphene/substrate interface. We demonstrate the seeded lateral epitaxy of atomically smooth, exfoliatable GaSb films on a graphene-terminated GaSb (001) substrate. Pinhole defects in the graphene, which are created by the native oxide desorption from the substrate, serve as nucleation sites for GaSb, followed by lateral epitaxy and coalescence. Since the pinholes are small ( 10 nm diameter, up to 300 nm), films grown by seeded lateral epitaxy can be exfoliated to yield smooth, free-standing single-crystalline membranes. The fast surface diffusion on graphene and high chemical selectivity for nucleation at pinholes are essential in driving this mechanism. We track the evolution of GaSb film growth on grapheneterminated GaSb(001), a few atomic layers at a time,

by combining molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with insitu electron diffraction and photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), plus ex-situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Our experiments demonstrate that the introduction of defects provides a powerful knob for tuning epitaxial growth on 2D materials surfaces.
II. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Epitaxy and exfoliation of GaSb films
We first demonstrate the epitaxy and exfoliation of single crystalline GaSb films on a graphene-terminated GaSb (001) substrate. Fig. 1(a,b) shows reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns tracking the MBE-growth of GaSb directly on GaSb (001) and on graphene-terminated GaSb (001). On this sample, we layer transfer graphene on half of the GaSb (001) substrate using a wet transfer procedure similar to the one that has previously been used for remote epitaxy of GaAs, including an HCl etch to remove some of the native oxides from the substrate [3] (Methods). The other half of the sample has an exposed GaSb surface for direct epitaxy.
Immediately prior to growth we follow the standard procedure of annealing at 520 C in an Sb2/Sb1 flux to desorb the native oxides from the substrate. On the bare GaSb side, the native oxide removal is confirmed by the appearance of bright semi-streaky spots in the RHEED pattern. The graphene-terminated side looks qualitatively similar, although the pattern is not as bright and there is diffuse intensity around the specular reflection. We attribute these differences in part to scattering through monolayer graphene that is randomly oriented in-plane.
After 75 nm of GaSb film growth, on both sides of

2

FIG. 1. Epitaxy and exfoliation of GaSb on graphene-terminated GaSb (001). (a-d) GaSb epitaxy on a GaSb (001) substrate that is half covered with graphene. (a) Reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns along a [1¯10] azimuth, tracking direct epitaxy on the exposed GaSb region. Top: native oxide desorption at 530 C. Bottom: GaSb film
growth on the exposed GaSb substrate. Bulk reflections are marked by arrows. (b) RHEED patterns tracking oxide desorption
and growth on the graphene-terminated half of the substrate. (c) Schematic of the heterostructure. (g) X-ray diffraction pattern
of the GaSb film grown on the graphene-terminated side of GaSb (001). (e-g) GaSb membrane exfoliation using a Ni stressor
layer. (e) SEM image of the under side of the exfoliated GaSb membrane. (f) SEM images of the substrate after exfoliation.
(g) X-ray diffraction patterns of the 004 reflection for the exfoliated GaSb membrane (blue) and the GaSb substrate (black).

the sample we observe a distinct ring of spots RHEED pattern with 3× superstructure reflections corresponding to the expected c(2 × 6) reconstruction of GaSb (001) [Fig. 1(a,b), bottom]. This indicates that a well-ordered, smooth epitaxial film has grown on both the bare substrate side and on the graphene-terminated side. X-ray diffraction measurements confirm epitaxial GaSb growth with no impurity phases (Fig. 1d). Closer inspection of the 006 reflection reveals a subtle shift of the film reflection to lower angle compared to the substrate, or a larger out-of-plane lattice parameter. We speculate that this shift may arise from strain induced by the underlying graphene, e.g. due to the large thermal expansion

mismatch between graphene and GaSb. Alternatively, the shift may be due to slight wrinkling of the GaSb film since it resting on a graphene interlayer.
Our GaSb films can be mechanically exfoliated from the graphene-terminated side of the sample, using a Ni stressor layer (Methods). Figs. 1(e,f) show scanning electron micrographs of the top side of the substrate and the bottom side of the exfoliated membrane, after exfoliation. The large scale SEM images are comparable to previous demonstrations of remote epitaxy of other III-V materials, including GaAs and InP [3, 6], and show minimal spalling marks or tears. X-ray diffraction measurements of the exfoliated membranes (Fig. 1g) confirm that the

3 membrane itself is single crystalline.

B. Holes created by native oxide desorption

We now show that GaSb films grow on grapheneterminated GaSb (001) via a lateral epitaxy, seeded at pinhole defects. We first examine the creation of pinhole defects in graphene, which form due to native oxide desorption from the substrate immediately prior to GaSb film growth.
Fig 2b shows two models of the graphene/GaSb substrate interface, immediately after the graphene layer transfer but before heating the sample to the film growth temperature. For an idealized transfer, the graphene/GaSb interface would be chemically clean and atomically sharp. This allows the lattice potential of the crystalline substrate to permeate through monolayer graphene and serve as the template for subsequent film growth in a remote epitaxy mode. However, such clean interfaces can be difficult to fabricate in practice, especially for III-V semiconductor substrates like GaSb since III-Vs are typically terminated with an amorphous  3 nm thick native oxide. This oxide must be removed before film growth in order to reveal the underlying crystalline template for an epitaxial film. Although we adopt an HCl etching procedure to remove the substrate native oxides prior to forming the graphene/substrate interface (Methods), some residual oxides may remain.
Our in-situ photoemission spectroscopy measurements reveal that some interfacial oxides remain after the etch procedure. Fig. 2(a) shows in-situ x-ray photoemission spectra (XPS) of the O 1s and Sb 3d core levels for a graphene-terminated GaSb(001) sample, as a function of annealing. These measurements are performed in an interconnected MBE + XPS chamber, such that samples are annealed and measured without removing them from ultrahigh vacuum (p < 5 × 10-10 Torr). After a 350 C ultrahigh vacuum anneal to clean surface adsorbates, we observe a significant O 1s intensity at binding energy of 531 eV. In addition, we observe a satellite to the Sb 3d3/2 core level at binding energy of 540 eV, indicative of Sb-oxides.
Further annealing removes most of the oxides, despite the presence of the graphene overlayer. After annealing at 515C with an Sb2/Sb1 flux, no oxide components are detected in the Sb 3d or Ga 3p core levels, suggesting that the GaSb-oxides have fully desorbed. We also observe a finite O 1s core level intensity that decreases as a result of the 515C anneal, and decreases further after the 540C anneal. At this point the chemical state of the remaining oxygen above 515C is unclear, since no oxide components are detected in the Ga 3p, Sb 3d, or C 1s core levels, indicating that neither the GaSb substrate nor the graphene itself is oxidized (Supplemental Fig. S-1). This indicates that the remaining oxygen at high temperature must be weakly coordinated to the graphene or GaSb, yet remain trapped in the near surface region of the sample.

FIG. 2. Native oxides desorption from the graphene/GaSb interface. (a) In-situ photoemission spectra of the Sb 3d and O 1s core levels, tracking the desorption of native oxides by annealing. (b) Schematics of idealized and real interfaces, after a chemical etch but before thermal oxide desorption.
Further experiments are needed to understand the oxygen that remains after nominal GaSb-oxide desorption. We find similar results for the native oxide desorption from graphene-terminated GaAs (001) substrates (Supplemental Fig. S-2). Variations on the anneal, including annealing in a H2/Ar forming gas, also revealed residual oxygen and Sb-oxides after light annealing (Supplemental Fig. S-3).
Combined RHEED, AFM, SEM and Raman spectroscopy reveal that the interfacial oxides desorb by creating pinholes in the graphene. Fig. 3 tracks the evolution of surface morphology during native oxide desorption. The sample lightly annealed at 350C appears qualitatively smooth with no tears or holes observed in the SEM images (Fig. 3a). AFM topography reveals a bumpy morphology with height variations of  2 nanometers and hints of the underlying GaSb step and terrace morphology, with terrace length  100 nm (Fig. 3c, left). We attribute the slightly bumpy morphology to the presence of some interfacial oxides. Raman spectroscopy at this stage shows sharp G and 2D bands with no detectable D peak, which is commonly used as a metric to indicate minimal defects in the graphene.
After annealing at 450C, the onset of native oxide desorption, pinholes with diameter  10 nm are observed in the AFM phase and height images (Fig. 3b,c, middle column and Fig. 3e). The distinct contrast in the

4

FIG. 3. Holes created by native oxide desorption. (a) SEM images and RHEED patterns tracking the native oxide
desorption and creation of large 300 nm diameter holes. (b) AFM height images. Pinholes with diameter  10 nm appear at the onset of native oxide desorption, 450C. (c) AFM phase contrast images. The phase contrast arises from differences
in elastic modulus between the graphene and the holes with exposed GaSb. (d) Schematic of the oxide desorption process leading to the creation of holes with different sizes. (e) AFM height and phase line profiles extracted from the 450C sample.
The corresponding line cut is marked by the blue line in the AFM images. (g) Raman spectra at various stages during oxide desorption. A strong D peak appears coincides with the appearance of large holes after annealing at 540C.

AFM phase suggests a different elastic modulus in the holes (exposed GaSb) compared to away from the pinholes (graphene). We interpret these holes to be created by the native oxide desorption process, as illustrated in Fig. 3(d). These pinholes are difficult to observe at SEM length scales (Fig. 3(a)) and are not readily detected by Raman spectroscpy since the sample does not have an observable D peak (Fig. 3f). The RHEED signature of the beginnings of oxide desorption is a sharpening of the specular reflection (Fig. 3a, middle insert). With further annealing up to 540C, the density and diameter of the pinholes increases as observed in the AFM images. Additionally, we observe larger  300 nm diameter holes in the SEM images. After the 540C anneal, a significant D band is present in the Raman spectrum, which is indicative of graphene defects. We observe similar pinhole formation from native oxide desorption on grapheneterminated GaAs substrates (Supplemental Fig. S-2).

C. Seeded lateral epitaxy in graphene holes
These holes serve as nucleation sites for direct epitaxial growth. Fig. 4 tracks the evolution of GaSb film growth on the graphene/GaSb (001) surface after native oxide desorption. After 0.5 monolayers (ML) of GaSb growth, AFM and SEM measurements show that the GaSb islands selectively nucleate in the pinholes ( 10 nm, Fig. 4a) and in the larger holes (300 nm, Fig. 4b), rather than on the graphene. We attribute the selective nucleation at pinholes to the fact that exposed holes to the substrate are more chemically reactive than the relatively inert graphene. After 2 ML of GaSb growth, nearly all of the holes have nucleated GaSb islands. After 5 ML growth, the islands begin to grow laterally (Fig. 4a). At 50-100 ML, the islands begin to coalesce (Fig. 4b). Finally, after 200 ML a smooth GaSb film surface is recovered, with an atomic step-and-terrace morphology observed by AFM. Our results indicate that the holes

5

FIG. 4. Seeded lateral epitaxy at the graphene pinholes. (a) AFM images tracking the evolution of GaSb nucleation
at pinholes in the graphene (< 2 monolayers, ML), followed by lateral overgrowth (5 ML) and coalescence into an atomically
stepped continuous film (200 ML). One monolayer is defined as half the thickness of a unit cell a/2 = 3 Angstrom, corresponding to an areal density of 5.4 × 1014 atoms/cm2 each of Ga and Sb. The GaSb growth temperature was 500C and the oxide desorption temperatures were 520 - 540C. Inserts show RHEED patterns at each stage of growth. (b) SEM images showing
the nucleation at both small and large holes. The islands begin to coalesce around 50-100 ML, and full coalescence is observed
after 200 ML film growth. (c) Schematic of lateral epitaxy seeded at holes in the graphene.

created by native oxide desorption serve as sites for the nucleation, lateral epitaxy, and coalescence of GaSb films (Fig. 4c).
Despite the presence of holes, GaSb films grown by a seeded lateral epitaxy mode can be exfoliated, as shown in the large scale SEM images of Fig. 1e,f. To understand this exfoliation further, in Fig. 5 we show higher magnification SEM images of the substrate after GaSb membrane exfoliation. In Fig 5(a) we observe elongated clusters of spalling marks with width  300 nm and length ranging from 300 nm to several microns, which have approximately the same size and areal density as the 300 nm diameter holes observed in Fig. 3(a). We attribute these spalling marks to direct epitaxy in the 300 nm holes, where the film remains stuck to the GaSb substrate rather than being peeled away with the film/membrane. Other regions of the substrate appear relatively smooth at this length scale (Fig. 5(b)), since the original 300 nm holes from oxide desorption are sparsely distributed across the sample. Zooming into this relatively smooth region, we observe smaller scale  10 nm islands (Fig.

5(d)), which we attribute to the film sticking at the  10 nm graphene pinholes. These pinholes are typically evenly distributed across the sample after oxide desorption.
III. DISCUSSION
Our experiments reveal that pinhole defects drive the seeded lateral epitaxy of GaSb on graphene-terminated GaSb (001). These pinholes are created by native oxide desorption from the substrate. The resulting GaSb films have similar characteristics as films grown by remote epitaxy [2, 3, 5, 6], namely, epitaxial alignment to the underlying substrate, smooth atomically stepped surfaces, and the ability to exfoliate macroscopically smooth films. We understand the growth in terms of a balance between several atomic scale processes, as illustrated in Fig. 6. This balance dictates whether the growth is in a seeded lateral epitaxy regime or a remote epitaxy regime.
Seeded lateral epitaxy occurs in the graphene/GaSb

6

FIG. 6. Seeded lateral epitaxy. (a) Pinholes are created by the native oxide desorption, which then serve as nucleation sites for epitaxial growth. (b) Schematic potential  for adatoms diffusing on the graphene-terminated surface, with diffusion length . Seeded lateral epitaxy is expected if  >> L.

FIG. 5. Exfoliation of GaSb films that are seeded at pinholes. (a) SEM image of the substrate side after exfoliation, showing  300 nm diameter spalling marks and clusters of spalling marks. The size and spatial distribution of these spalling marks matches the large holes observed in Fig. 3a. (b) SEM images showing a relatively smooth region of the substrate after exfoliation. No large 300 nm spalling marks are observed. (c) Cartoon of the exfoliation. (d) Magnified SEM image of the relatively smooth region. Particles with diameter  10 nm are observed. We attribute these to nucleation in the  10 nm graphene pinholes.
system because (1) graphene is chemically inert and (2) the surface diffusion length  is long compared to the average spacing L between pinhole defects ( >> L). Previous experiments on confinement heteroepitaxy demonstrate that the effective surface diffusion length on graphene is of order 10 microns, since metal adatoms preferentially nucleate at graphene defects over length scales of order 10 microns [9]. Our preliminary experiments on lithographically defined graphene stripes reveals a similar picture (Supplemental Fig. S-4). We find that during the early stages of nucleation for GaAs films on patterned graphene/Ge(001), the GaAs preferentially nucleates at exposed regions of the Ge substrate, even when the spacing between graphene openings is 10 microns. This   10 micron effective diffusion length is much larger than the L  100 nm spacing between pinhole defects on graphene/GaSb(001). Therefore, adatoms can sample enough of the surface to nucleate at pinhole defects, rather than on the inert graphene. If the spacing between defects were larger or if the graphene were defect free ( < L), then the system would be closer to a remote epitaxy regime.
The long effective surface diffusion length arises from a combination of long surface diffusion and a high adatom desorption rate (Fig. 6a), since the sticking coefficient of Ga and Sb adatoms on inert masks at 500C is less than

unity. Similar behavior has been observed for selective area epitaxy of III-V films on patterned dielectric masks, such as SiO2 and SiNx [10].
We compare energy scales associated with different sites using the potential landscape shown in Fig 6b. On graphene-terminated regions, the combined potential modulations from the graphene itself and from the substrate that permeate through graphene are expected to be weak. Density functional theory calculations suggest these modulations are of order   15 meV [6], which is smaller than the thermal energy kBT  70 meV at growth temperature 500C. An estimate of the free carrier screening from graphene also suggests this potential should be weak. For a free electron gas with density 1019-1020 cm-3, the same density as graphene (graphite) [11], the Thomas-Fermi screening length is approximately 1/k0  2 °A. This is less than the film/substrate layer spacing of  5 °A[3], suggesting that the screened potential above the graphene is exponentially weak. In contrast, the potential modulation at a graphene pinhole is expected to be much larger,   1 eV, since this involves adatoms making chemical bonds to the graphene or to the underlying substrate. The pinholes provide the low energy sites for nucleation and growth. Epitaxial registry is obtained because the pinholes are locations of direct epitaxy to the substrate. Given these factors that favor seeded lateral epitaxy when there is a finite density of graphene defects, it is possible that some previous demonstrations of remote epitaxy can alternatively be explained by a seeded lateral epitaxy mechanism.
Seeded lateral epitaxy retains many of the most promising features of remote epitaxy. Since these pinholes are small, the films can still be exfoliated. Additionally, because the majority of the film/substrate interface is still decoupled by the monolayer graphene barrier, we expect similar slippery strain relaxation pathways to apply for highly mismatched growth [1].
The seeded lateral epitaxy mode has two promising

7

additional features. Firstly, seeded lateral epitaxy is tolerant to an imperfect graphene/substrate interface. Despite the oxides present at the graphene/GaSb substrate interface after graphene transfer, epitaxial growth can still be achieved by desorbing the native oxide to create pinholes. This tolerance is crucial for translating epitaxy on graphene-terminated surfaces to wafer scale, since it is difficult to perform native oxide-free graphene layer transfers at wafer scale and difficult to grow graphene directly on arbitrary substrates. Secondly, the controlled patterning of nanoscale openings in graphene provides a route to precisely engineer the size, location, and spatial distribution of nucleation sites (Supplemental Fig. S-4), and resulting properties of the films. For example, controlled openings may provide selective anchoring points to control the properties of films that undergo solid-solid phase transitions, e.g. ferroelectric materials and shape memory alloys.
IV. METHODS
Graphene synthesis and transfer. Our graphene synthesis and transfer procedure is a modified polymerassisted wet transfer of CVD-grown graphene [12], similar to the transfer recipe from previous demonstrations of remote epitaxy [3, 6]. Graphene was grown by thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of ultra high purity CH4 at 1050 C on Cu foil, as described in Refs. [5, 13]. The graphene/Cu foils were then cut and and flattened using clean glass slides to match the dimensions of the semiconductor substrate. Approximately 200 nm of 950K C2 PMMA (Chlorobenzene base solvent, 2% by wt., Kayaku Advanced Materials, Inc.) was spin coated on the graphene/Cu foil at 2000 RPM for 2 minutes and left to cure at room temperature for 24 hours. Graphene on the backside of the Cu foil was removed via reactive ion etching using 90 W O2 plasma at a pressure of 100 mTorr for 30 s. The Cu foil was then etched by placing the PMMA/graphene/Cu foil stack on the surface of an etch solution containing 1-part ammonium persulfate (APS-100, Transene) and 3-parts H2O. After 16 hours of etching at room temperature, the floating PMMA/graphene membrane was scooped up with a clean glass slide and sequentially transferred onto five 5minute water baths to rinse any etch residuals.
GaSb (001) substrates were etched in 38% HCl solution for 5 minutes followed by a 2-propanol rinse to remove some of the native oxides. We then used the etched GaSb substrate to scoop the PMMA/graphene stack from the final water bath. To remove water at the graphene/substrate interface, the samples were baked in air at 50°C for 15 minutes, then at 150°C for another 15 minutes. The PMMA was dissolved by submerging the sample in an acetone bath at 80°C for 3 hours. This is followed by an IPA rinse and nitrogen drying. The sample is indium bonded onto a molybdenum puck and outgassed at 150°C for 2 hours in a loadlock at a pressure

p < 5×10-7 Torr before introduction to the MBE growth chamber. Finally, the sample is annealed at  350C for 1 hour in the MBE chamber to desorb organic residuals.
MBE growth of GaSb. GaSb films were grown in a custom molecular beam epitaxy chamber (Mantis Deposition) using an effusion cell for Ga and a thermal cracker cell for Sb (MBE Komponenten). Temperatures were measured using a pyrometer that is calibrated to the native oxide desorption temperature of GaAs. Insitu reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) measurements were performed using a Staib RHEED gun at 15 keV.
In-situ XPS. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed in an XPS chamber that is connected to the MBE via an ultrahigh vacuum (p < 5 × 10-10 Torr) transfer chamber, such that samples are transferred in vacuum and are not exposed to air. We use a non-monochromated Al K x-ray source (1486.6 eV) and an Omicron EA125 hemispherical analyzer with an energy resolution of 1.08eV. Samples were annealed in the MBE and measured in the XPS at room temperature.
AFM, SEM, and Raman spectroscopy. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed using a Zeiss GeminiSEM 450. Raman spectroscopy was performed using a 532 nm wavelength laser (Thermo Scientific DXR Raman Microscope). The laser power is kept below 5 mW in order to prevent damage to the graphene. In order to acquire representative raman spectra, 2600 spectra where captured and averaged over a 2500 µm2 area. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed using a Bruker Dimension Icon in tapping mode.
GaSb exfoliation. To exfoliate the GaSb epilayer, a 100 nm Ni stressor layer was deposited on the GaSb / graphene / GaSb (001) heterostructure at room temperature using a metal evaporator (Angstrom Engineering Inc.) in high-vacuum (p < 2 × 10-6 Torr). Thermal release tape (Revalpha 3195H, Semiconductor Equipment Corp.) was then stamped onto the sample, and the film can then be readily exfoliated by carefully peeling away the tape from the substrate.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
GaSb film growth was supported primarily by the National Science Foundation (DMR-1752797). Graphene transfers and III-V growth on patterned graphene were supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Administration (DARPA Grant number D19AP00088). Graphene synthesis and characterization are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under award no. DE-SC0016007. We gratefully acknowledge the use of Raman and electron microscopy facilities supported by the NSF through the University of Wisconsin Materials Research Science and Engineering Center under Grant No. DMR-1720415.

8
[1] S.-H. Bae, K. Lu, Y. Han, S. Kim, K. Qiao, C. Choi, Y. Nie, H. Kim, H. S. Kum, P. Chen, et al., Nature nanotechnology 15, 272 (2020).
[2] J. Jiang, X. Sun, X. Chen, B. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Guo, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Gao, et al., Nature communications 10, 1 (2019).
[3] Y. Kim, S. S. Cruz, K. Lee, B. O. Alawode, C. Choi, Y. Song, J. M. Johnson, C. Heidelberger, W. Kong, S. Choi, et al., Nature 544, 340 (2017).
[4] Y. Guo, X. Sun, J. Jiang, B. Wang, X. Chen, X. Yin, W. Qi, L. Gao, L. Zhang, Z. Lu, et al., Nano letters 20, 33 (2019).
[5] D. Du, S. Manzo, C. Zhang, V. Saraswat, K. T. Genser, K. M. Rabe, P. M. Voyles, M. S. Arnold, and J. K. Kawasaki, Nature Communications 12, 1 (2021).
[6] W. Kong, H. Li, K. Qiao, Y. Kim, K. Lee, Y. Nie, D. Lee, T. Osadchy, R. J. Molnar, D. K. Gaskill, et al., Nature materials 17, 999 (2018).
[7] H. S. Kum, H. Lee, S. Kim, S. Lindemann, W. Kong, K. Qiao, P. Chen, J. Irwin, J. H. Lee, S. Xie, et al., Nature 578, 75 (2020).
[8] Z. Lu, X. Sun, W. Xie, A. Littlejohn, G.-C. Wang, S. Zhang, M. A. Washington, and T.-M. Lu, Nanotechnology 29, 445702 (2018).
[9] N. Briggs, B. Bersch, Y. Wang, J. Jiang, R. J. Koch, N. Nayir, K. Wang, M. Kolmer, W. Ko, A. D. L. F. Duran, et al., Nature materials 19, 637 (2020).
[10] T. Nishinaga, T. Nakano, and S. Zhang, Japanese journal of applied physics 27, L964 (1988).
[11] C. A. Klein and W. D. Straub, Physical Review 123, 1581 (1961).
[12] H. Park, C. Lim, C.-J. Lee, J. Kang, J. Kim, M. Choi, and H. Park, Nanotechnology 29, 415303 (2018).
[13] R. M. Jacobberger and M. S. Arnold, Chemistry of Materials 25, 871 (2013).

9
FIG. S-1. Extended in-situ photoemission spectra of graphene on GaSb (001) tracking the native oxide desorption as a function of annealing. (a) Sb 3d and O 1s core levels. The Sb-oxide intensity goes to zero after the 515C anneal, but residual atomic O 1s remains. (b) C 1s. After the 515C anneal we observe a shift in the C 1s core level towards lower binding energy, which we attribute to de-oxidation. (c) Ga 3p. Ga-oxide components are not resolved in these spectra.
FIG. S-2. Native oxide desorption from a graphene/GaAs (001) sample. The CVD-grown graphene was wet transferred to GaAs (001) after an HCl etch to remove some of the GaAs native oxides. (a) Phtoemission spectra of the As 3p core level. Arsenic (As) oxides are detected after the 150 C anneal (red curve) and are desorbed after the 625 C anneal (black curve). (b) There is a corresponding change in the C 1s lineshape. (c) Ga 3p core level. (d) O 1s core level. (e) SEM image of the graphene/GaAs (001) surface after the 625C anneal, showing pinholes. (f) Cartoon of the pinholes created by native oxide desorption.

10

FIG. S-3.

Forming gas annealing of

graphene/GaSb(001). Photoemission spectra of forming

gas annealed graphene/GaSb (001) (green curve) compared

to vacuum annealed graphene/GaSb (001) (red curve). Both

spectra show significant Sb-oxides and O 1s. The forming

gas annealed sample was annealed in a tube furnace at 350C for two hours and then transferred through air to the

XPS system. The vacuum annealed sample was annealed in

ultrahigh vacuum in the XPS chamber, and thus did not get

exposed to air after the anneal.

11
FIG. S-4. GaAs selectivity on patterned graphene/Ge. The graphene was grown directly on the Ge (001) by CVD, thus avoiding the damage and interfacial oxides typically present for graphene layer transfers. We use photolithography and an oxygen plasma etch to define 10 micron wide stripes of alternating graphene and exposed Ge substrate. GaAs films were then grown on the patterned graphene substrate by MBE. (a) SEM image of GaAs nucleation on patterned graphene on a Ge (001) substrate. We observe selective nucleation of GaAs (light color) on the exposed Ge regions of the substrate, and no GaAs nucleation on the graphene. (b) Cartoon of the sample. (c) Raman spectra on the graphene masked region (black curves) and on the GaAs nucleation region (blue). Representative areas for these spectra are marked by the circles in the SEM image (a).

