Waveguide coupled III-V photodiodes monolithically integrated on Si
Pengyan Wen1, Preksha Tiwari1, Svenja Mauthe1, Heinz Schmid1, Marilyne Sousa1, Markus Scherrer1, Michael Baumann2, Bertold Ian Bitachon2, Juerg Leuthold2, Bernd Gotsmann1 and
Kirsten E. Moselund1,*
1IBM Research Europe ­ Zurich, Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland 2ETH Zürich, Instituteof Electromagnetic Fields (IEF), Gloriastrasse 35, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
*Correspondence to: kmo@zurich.ibm.com
Abstract
The seamless integration of III-V nanostructures on silicon is a long-standing goal and an important step towards integrated optical links. In the present work, we demonstrate scaled and waveguide coupled III-V photodiodes monolithically integrated on Si, implemented as InP/In0.5Ga0.5As/InP p-i-n structure. The waveguide coupled devices show a dark current down to 0.048 A/cm2 at ­1 V and a responsivity up to 0.2 A/W at ­2 V. Using grating couplers centered around 1320 nm, we observed a cutoff frequency f 3dB exceeding 70 GHz and data reception at 50 GBd with OOK and 4PAM. When operated in forward bias as light emitting diode, the devices emit light centered at 1550 nm. Furthermore, we also investigate the self heating of the devices using scanning thermal microscopy and find a temperature increase of only ~15 K during the device operation as emitter, in accordance with thermal simulation results.
Introduction
As the amount of data generated from modern communication applications such as cloud computing, analytics and storage systems is increasing rapidly, silicon electronic integrated circuits (ICs) are suffering from a bottleneck at the interconnection level resulting from the resistive interconnect [1, 2]. Electrons are ideal f or computation because they allow for
1

ultimately scaled logic gates which can be integrated in a massively parallel fashion using modern CMOS technologies. Photons on the other hand are ideal for transmission because this can be done almost loss-less. To get the best of both worlds it has thereforebeena long-standing goal to combine electronics and photonics on a silicon chip, and the distances over which optical on-chip signal transmission may become favorable are also slowly decreasing [3], bringing on-chip optical communication schemes closer.
At the length scales of optical chips, cross-talk may be avoided and the coherence of optical signals may be exploited to allow for transmitting signals of different wavelengths without interference as in wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) to increase bandwidth. State-ofthe-art high-speed Germanium (Ge) photodetectors showing high bandwidth of 100 GHz have been demonstrated [4]. However, relatively high dark currents of Ge detectors may lead to a low signal-to-dark current ratio [5] and more importantly, the indirect band gap of Ge prevents efficient light emission. Thus, for an on-chip integrated photoniclink there is a need to integrate alternative materials such as III-Vs to provide the active gain needed for emission. Beyond classical on-chip optical interconnect, there is also a rising interest in highly scaled integrated photonic components, notably single-photondetectors and emitters for applications in quantum computing [6, 7].
High performance on-chip lasers and detectors have been demonstrated based on bonding of a III-V laser stack including quantum wells on top of a silicon wafer with pre -fabricated waveguides and passives [8-10]. The beauty of wafer-bonding is that the full III-V stack is grown lattice matched on an InP substrate and then transferred onto the silicon photonics wafer either as individual chiplet or as a full wafer [11, 12], this allows for perfect material quality. However, the active III-V material is generally integrated on-top of the photonics integrated circuit (PIC) and therefore necessitates to couple the light evanescently back and forth from the III-V active material on top to the silicon underneath. Whereas photonic devices will
2

inevitably be larger than electronic ones, today's state-of-the art high-performance integrated photonic components tend to be orders of magnitude larger measuring 100s of micrometers. To reduce the RC time constant, which is an important factor for power consumption, devices need to be scaled down. In the past few years, research efforts have therefore been focused on the development of scaled hybrid III-V/Si nanophotonic devices, including nanowire photodetectors [13, 14], nanowire light sources [15-17] and photoconductors acting as both detectors and emitters coupled by a polymer waveguide [18]. Although high crystal quality IIIV nanowires can be achieved and used for devices, the vertical geometry from a device fabrication perspectiverequires additional engineeringand pick-and-place methods for on-chip integration and waveguide coupled solutions [19, 20]. These limitations may be overcomewith template-assisted selective epitaxy (TASE) [21-23], which has been demonstrated originally for electronics applications [24, 25] and more recently for monolithic optically pumped emitters and high-speed photodetectors [26-29].
In the present work, we demonstrate waveguide coupleddevices with gratingcouplers centered at 1320 nm. We study two different device architectures based on either a straight or a T-shape architecture. In addition, we implemented a double heterostructures (n-InP/i-InGaAs/p-InP) to improve carrier confinement. The improved electrostatics enables the investigation of the emission properties when operated as a light-emitting diode (LED). Thermal characteristics of the devices are important factors for performance and reliability evaluation. We investigate the in-situ temperature profile by scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) and establish that the associated temperature increase is within the acceptable range for device operation [30]. Using grating couplers centered around 1320nm, we evaluate the detector performance under various signal encoding schemes and observe data reception at 100 Gbps.
Results
3

Device fabrication and material characterization. The devices are fabricated on a conventional SOI substrate using TASE, the process is illustrated in Fig. 1a. First, we pattern the top silicon layer by a combination of e-beam lithography and dry etching of silicon. Both the features of the future detectors and all silicon passives, such as waveguides and grating couplers are etched in this step (Fig. 1a (1­2)), which provides for inherent self -alignment of the III-Vs and silicon features. The silicon features are then embedded in a uniform SiO2 layer, deposited as a combination of atomic layer deposited (ALD) and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited (PECVD) SiO2, which is thinned down and planarized by chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP). An opening in the oxide is made to expose the silicon in areas where the Si will be replaced with III-V material. The Si is then selectively etched back using tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) to form a hollow oxide template with a Si seed at one extremity (Fig. 1a 3).
Figure 1 Template-assisted selective epitaxy fabrication process. a, Simplified schematic of the fabrication process: 1. SOI wafer. 2. Patterned top Si layer. 3. Partial etch-back of Si to form hollow
4

SiO2 template with Si seed. 4. MOCVD growth of p-i-n device, the arrow in the inset shows the growth direction. 5. Ni/Au contacts on the nanostructure. 6. Microscope image of a straight device and the coupler in the inset. b, Top view scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a straight device. c, Top view SEM of a T-shape device. d, Cross section false-colored SEM image of a T-shape device showing the oxide-filled gap separating the Si waveguide and the III-V active material.
In the next step (Fig. 1a 4) the desired III-V profile is grown within the template by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). In this work we grow a n-InP/i-InGaAs/p-InP/pInGaAs sandwich structure.The role of the two wider bandgap InP regions is to improve carrier confinement in the i-InGaAs region. Note that the InGaAs region is not completely intrinsic but will have a slight n-type doping as a result of parasitic carbon doping in the MOCVD. The p-InGaAs growth is intended to improve contacting as it can be difficult to obtain a good Ohmic contact on p-type InP. Details on the growth conditions can be found in the supplementary information. Following growth, the top oxide is uniformly thinned further to obtain a thickness of 10 nm to enable the thermal measurements and facilitate contacting. Ni-Au metal contacts are implemented by e-beam lithography and lift-off (Fig. 1a 5).
A series of devices were fabricated on a SOI wafer with a thickness of 220 nm, and varying device width (w) of the III-V region with w = 200 nm, w = 350 nm, and w = 500 nm. At the opposite end of the waveguide, a focusing grating coupler is implemented for diffracting light at around 1320 nm for a targeted incident angle of 10º. As it is illustrated in Fig. 1a, we focused on two different device architectures. One, where the III-V material is grown as an extension of the waveguide (Fig. 1b) ­ we refer to this as the "straight" device. In addition, there is a structure where the III-V material is grown with a nucleation seed on a separate Si structure orthogonal to the optical waveguide with the grating coupler ­ we refer to this as the "T-shape" device (Fig. 1c). Fig. 1d shows the cross-section SEM of a T-shape device, the Si waveguide is separated from the orthogonally grown III-V structure by a small oxide-filled gap (~50 nm).
5

The motivation behind the two device architectures is that each structure provides different benefits and challenges. The straight structure is the easiest from a conceptual point of view and the propagating mode will be coupled directly from the silicon waveguide to the III-V region. The draw-back is that contacts will inevitably need to be in the path of the optical mode which will most likely result in a higher absorption loss from the metal. In the T-shape structure, the III-V is grown orthogonal to the waveguide, therefore no contacts need to be placed on top of the waveguide and the waveguide may directly end at the i-region. However, the coupling efficiency across the thin gap is unknown and this m ight lead to back-reflections in the silicon waveguide. Conceptually there are advantages andchallenges to both approaches, so investigating this trade-off is one of the objectives of the present work.
Figure 2 Nanostructure of p-i-n device and EDS analysis. a, Bright field STEM overview image of a 350 nm straight device. b, EDS overview map of the p-i-n device. Here, P, Pt and Au appear blue because the EDS signal of P K-shell is near to the Pt and Au M-shell. c, EDS elemental profiles acquired along Line 1 defined in (a). d, High resolution bright field STEM images taken at Si/n-InP interface
6

(orange box marked in a).e, High resolution bright field STEM images taken at n-InP/i-InGaAs interface (green box marked in a), insertion is the high-resolution STEM of the i-InGaAs. To investigate the device architecture and material quality, a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) lamella was prepared on a straight device using focused ion beam (FIB). Fig. 2a shows the overview STEM image of the sample. A tilted Si (111) crystal facet is observed at the IIIV/Si interface where the growth initiated. This is due to the anisotropic TMAH etch, which will terminate on a (111) plane.
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed along the device, as pre sented in Fig. 2b. From left to right, p-InGaAs region (in red), p-InP (in blue), i-InGaAs (in red) and the n-InP (in blue). The observed shape and width of the sections stem from the individual crystal facets formed during the growth sequencewhich can leadto a device variability. Further studies to finetune the epitaxial processes are ongoing. We note that using a similar geometry on a InP substrate the growth of sharp and vertical quantum wells was demonstrated [31, 32].
Fig. 2c presents a line profile acquired along the "line 1" as indicated in Fig. 2a. Pronounced transition regions with apparently graded compositions are visible and attributed to the nonorthogonal alignment of the crystal growth facets to the beam direction, with the exception of the starting Si-InP interface. We also observe that the intrinsic InGaAs region appears more Inrich (75 % In) compared to the p-region (53% In), which can be explained by the effect of the introduced doping precursor on composition and growth [33, 34].
The high resolution (HR) bright field (BF) STEM image in Fig. 2d shows an overall sharp InP/Si interface, with projection effects appearingas blurred area. Similarly, the HR BF-STEM image in Fig. 2e shows a sharp interface between the i-InGaAs and the n-InP with some projection effects. The inset shows a representative HR BF-STEM of the i-InGaAs with high crystalline quality which enables electrically stimulated light emission from the device.
7

Thermal effects of the device. To reach a thorough understanding of the thermal effects on nanometer scale and hence, be able to understand its impact on device performance, we performed thermal simulation using Ansys Mechanical APDL and experimental measurements using scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) [35] on a T-shape device (w=500 nm). The SThM allows to measure the surface temperature quantitatively with about 10 nm lateral resolution while applying a bias to the device. Specifics of the SThM setup as well as the other setups used can be found in the supplementary material section.
Fig. 3a shows the simulated temperature increase as a function of applied forward bias along with a measured SThM result. The resulting temperature rise compares well with SThM data, where an AC modulated bias of about 3 V amplitude is applied on the device. Fig. 3b and c show the simulated and measured temperature distribution of the device operating at 3 V, from which we observe a very good agreement between experimental and simulation data in terms of temperature increase. Fig. 3d shows the temperature increase alongthe black and red dashed line in Fig. 3c. Except for a local high temperature region at the contact edge, which might be caused by local high resistance at the contact, the overall temperature increase in the III-V is only around 15 K.
The temperature increase of the device while working as detector in reverse bias depends on the light injection in the III-V region, as in addition to creating an electron-hole pair the absorption of a photon will also lead to the creation of phonons and heating of the device. While light injection is not possible in the SThM setup, we can measure any temperature increase associated with the reverse bias drift current, but we expect this to be negligible in comparison. Therefore, we performed thermal simulations in the reverse bias case and the result shows a temperature increase of ~50 K when assuming a light injection of 3.16 mW (corresponding to the maximum laser power used for detection). Hence, we conclude that we do not expect any catastrophic thermal breakdown in these devices under the usedmeasurement
8

conditions, which is in agreement with our experimental observations. The detailed simulation results of the detector can be found in the supplementary material Fig. S4.
Figure 3 Thermal characterization of device. a, Temperature increase dependent on applied voltage (operating as emitter). b, Simulated temperature distribution of 500 nm T-shape device operating at 3 V. c, SThM image showing topography and color-coded temperature rise of the device working as emitter with applied voltage of 3V. d, Temperature profile along the black and red dashed line in c from SThM measurements, inset: SEM image of the measured device. Electroluminescence as emitter. In forward bias the device can be used as a light-emitting diode (LED), where the undoped InGaAs region acts as the active region for the emitter. However, the grating couplers cannot be used in this mode as their transmission is optimized for 1320 nm and the emission from the InGaAs region is centered around 1550 nm. Emission measurements are therefore performedin a free-spacecoupled optical setup in reflection mode. More details on the optical measurements can be found in the supplementary materials.
9

Figure 4 Electrically pumped light emission. a, Electroluminescence (EL) spectra under CW operation measured at 100 K, 200 K and 300 K of a 350 nm T-shape device (T3). b, Current-voltage (I-V) curves measured from 80 K to 300 K. c, EL peak wavelength dependence on injection current at various temperatures from 80 K to 300 K.
The electroluminescence (EL) measurements were performed under CW operation from 80 K to 300 K. Fig. 4a shows the EL spectra of the T-shape device (T3) with a device width of 350 nm. An EL peak centered around 1550 nm is observedat room temperature whena forward bias of 2.5 V is applied across the device. As illustrated in Fig. 4a, a blueshift of the EL peak is observed upon increasing the applied bias on the device. The reason for the different biasing regimes at different temperatures is the temperature dependent threshold voltage shift, which is illustrated in Fig. 4b. A significant forward current increase with temperature is observed when comparing the same bias voltage, which results in the EL intensity increase as temperature goes higher. The reverse current also increases as the temperature increases, this is expected as the reverse saturation current of a diode is highly temperature dependent and may further increase due to the activation of defect centers acting as current paths.
For detailed comparison, the EL peak wavelength dependence on injection current at various temperatures from 80 K to 300 K is shown in Fig. 4c. The injection-current dependent blueshift of the EL peak is likely due to the band fillingeffect of the carrier injection in the active region.
10

The injected carriers prefer to first fill the states with lower energy and emit light with longer wavelengths. As the injection current or bias voltage increases, the states with lower energy are occupied and the carriers fill the higher energy states, which results in EL with shorter wavelengths. Increased carrier injection is also predicted to influence the refractive index (plasma dispersion effect) and we observe this in our microdisk lasers [36], but as we here consider an LED without a resonant cavity, the impact of a change in refractive index should be minimal. In addition to the EL blueshift, a temperature dependent redshift of the EL peak was observed when comparing the same injection current, which is due to the bandgap shrinkage of InGaAs as the temperature of the cryostat environment increases. This result correlates with the thermal measurements, where we observed a 15 K temperature increase at 3 V, indicating that device self -heating was not a limiting factor for the LED operation.
Responsivity as photodetector. In order to evaluate the detector performance of the devices, we measured them in a fiber coupled setup. For the dynamic measurement, light is coupled from a single mode optical fiber into the silicon waveguide via the grating coupler. As the transmission spectrum of the grating coupler is quite narrow, all the dynamic detection measurements are performed at a wavelength of 1320 nm. Our earlier work on smaller form factor detectors [29] showed a non-linear spectral dependence, therefore, we evaluated this for these new waveguide-coupled structures as well. As expected in these larger devices we did not observe any unusual trends, more information can be found in the supplementary material. We investigated seven waveguide coupled devices of different dimensions, three T-shape devices and four straight devices.
Fig. 5a shows the responsivity of two T-shape (T1, T3) and one straight (S4) devices excluding the 6 dB coupling loss of the waveguide and the coupler. We also expect there to be significant additional absorption losses resulting either from the metal contacts placed directly on top of the III-V region (straight shape) or from the coupling from the Si waveguide to the III-V
11

absorption region (T-shape), hence the values of responsivity presented herein should be considered as a lower boundary.

As we increase the reverse bias, the responsivity of all devices increases with the reverse

voltage in two slopes which can be described by the different carrier transport mechanisms.

Responsivity depends on the carrier trapping at the heterojunction interfaces and carrier drift

in the intrinsic region of the junction. Applying a reverse bias will result in the lowering of

potential barriers at the heterojunctions while the series resistance reduces with the induced

photocurrent. T1, T3 and S4 show responsivities of 0.18, 0.08 and 0.21 A/W at ­2 V,

respectively. This corresponds to an external quantum efficiency () of 19 %, 8 % and 22

%

(

=

 

×

,


where



is

the

responsivity,



is

the

wavelength,



is

the

Planck

constant

divided by 2,  is the speed of light in vacuum,  is the elementary charge). Fig. 5b shows the

current-voltage (I-V) curves without light (dark green) and under illumination with a 1320 nm

laser coupled from the Si waveguide. The dashed dark green I-V curve was measuredat a probe

station with high resolution, displaying a dark current of around 0.048 A/cm2 at ­1 V

(normalized to the device cross section), which is two decades lower compared to our

previously reported pure InGaAs devices and comparable to high-speed bonded membrane III-

V photodetectors [8, 29].

Fig. 5c, d and e show the normalized dark current at ­1 V, the responsivity at ­2 V and f3dB for devices with different architectures and device width, respectively. By comparing these parameters, a clear inverse trend for the responsivity and the f 3dB is observed for each device, i.e. those devices showing a higher responsivity tend to register a lower f 3dB. We believe this trade-off is mainly due to a longer time required to extract the carriers for a device with higher responsivity. For example if contacts are (unintentionally) positioned to absorb a significant fraction of light, it will result in a smaller responsivity as the light absorbed by the contacts is

12

lost, but it might also make the device faster if the contacts absorb the light generated at the edges of the i-region. Electromagnetic simulations were performed to obtain theoretical values of the responsivity. The simulation results are described in more detail in supplementary material Fig. S9. Depending on the geometry, the amount of light abso rbed in the i-region lies between 10 % and 20 % which is in good agreement with the measured values. This indicates a high internal quantum efficiency enabled by a material with high crystalline quality.
Figure 5 Static characterization of the p-i-n photodetectors. a, Responsivity of T1, T3 (T-shape) and S4 (straight). b, I-V curves of T3 without light (dark green) and with 1320 nm waveguide coupled laser power varying from 0.10 mW to 3.16 mW. c, Dark current (at ­1 V) dependence on device width and architectures. d, Responsivity dependence on device width and architectures. e, Frequency dependence on device width and architectures. High speed operation. To achieve high data rates and a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), not only the cut-off frequency but also the saturation photocurrent is of interest. In addition to the
13

highest current, higher modulation formats, such as the 4-level pulse-amplitude modulation (4PAM) demonstrated here, also have increased requirements for linearity. Following the discussion in [37] we identify three components that limit linearity: thermal effects, voltage drop in the series resistance and carrier screening.

High optical and electrical power densities ultimately cause catastrophic thermal failure. We concluded from our thermal results and experiment experience that a reverse voltage of ­2 V together with an optical power level of 7 dBm was usually safe in this regard.

The other two effects mentioned above also limit the linearity, but do not cause catastrophic failure. High photocurrents lead to a voltage drop in the series resistance and the refore reduce the reverse voltage applied across the p-i-n junction. An estimation of the maximum photocurrent can therefore be made as:

sat

=

rev+bi s

(1)

In addition, photocarriers in the intrinsic region form a screening field proportional to the optical power [38], also limiting the optical power. Since this screening field depends on the excess carrier density, the effect is expected to be more pronounced in small detectors like the ones presented here.

To investigate the impact of these effects, we measured the linearity of a 200 nm wide device

(T2) at different bias voltages and small-signal frequencies. Fig. 4a and b show the resulting

linearity curves. The measurements were fitted with the saturation expression

out

=

(in)2 1+(sinat)2

,

(2)

where  contains the responsivity  as well as system RF losses and the 50  load resistance.

The saturation power value sat is the 3 dB compression point and is given in the figure legend.

A clear bias dependence can be seen, whereas no clear frequency dependence was observed.

14

The linearity measurements suggest that under safe operating conditions, an input power of up to 10 dBm still results in a fairly linear response. Due to the scaling of the power limitations we expect wider devices to perform even better.
Figure 6 Linearity and dynamic characterization of the photodetectors. a, Linearity at 1 GHz measured at different reverse bias voltages. b, Linearity measured at a constant 1.5 V reverse bias for different small signal frequencies. c, Radio frequency (RF) signal response dependence on modulation frequency of the input signal. d, 50 GBd_OOK eye diagram of T3 (350 nm). e, 50 GBd_4PAM eye diagram of T3. Fig. 6c shows a bandwidth measurement corrected for the system losses of T3, the same device measured for the emission. Consistent with the DC responsivity, the RF power at zero bias is 12 dB lower than the saturated value at ­1 V. At ­1.5 V, the device shows no clear cut-off up to the setup-limited frequency of 70 GHz. The ripples in the frequency response are most likely caused by RF reflections at the unterminated photodiode. In the present devices contacts have not been optimized for RF performance, we believe that optimization of device and contact
15

design could lead to further gains in performance, in line with what we observed from detectors based on wafer bonding [39].
We performed a data transmission experiment on the same device to show the capability of the fabricated photodiodes. Fig. 6d and e show the digitally interpolated eye diagram of 50 Gbit/s on-off keying (OOK) and 100 Gbit/s four-level pulse-amplitude modulation (4PAM). We use non-return to zero (NRZ) signaling scheme for both rates. For the 50 Gbit/s transmission we achieve a bit-error rate (BER) of 3.21×10-5 which is below the hard decision forward-error correction (FEC) limit of 3.8×10-3 [40]. In contrast, we achieve a BER of 1.17×10-2 for the 100 Gbit/s transmission. This BER is below the soft decision FEC limit of 4.2×10 -2 [41]. A subset of the data-transmission results of a single device have been presented at the Optical Fiber Communication (OFC) conference [42].
Discussion
In conclusion, we demonstrated waveguide coupled III-V heterostructure photodiodes monolithically integrated on Si with sub-micron dimensions. The devices show light emission centered at 1550 nm when operating in forward bias as an LED. A blueshift was observed with increasing bias which we attribute to band-fillingeffect, and the threshold voltage of the diodes also showed a strong temperature dependence.
In photodetection mode the devices show a dark current down to 0.048 A/cm2 at ­1 V and responsivity up to 0.2 A/W at ­2 V. This value is not corrected with respect to additional losses due to coupling from the Si waveguide to the III-V active region and should be understood as a lower boundary. With the grating couplers centered around 1320 nm, a detection bandwidth exceeding 70 GHz was demonstrated, which enables data transmission at 50 GBd with OOK and 4PAM. A trade-off was observed among different devices in terms of responsivity and f3dB. We believe that there is significant potential to further optimize the device width, the length of
16

the i-region or improve the coupling from Si to III-V for the T-shape devices and contacting scheme for straight devices, which could lead to further improvement in responsivity and detection beyond 100 Gbps. Thermal effects were evaluated by simulation and SThM for both emission and detection operation and in both modes of operation we find an acceptable temperature increase for stable operation. These findings also correlate with the optical measurements and the measureddevice linearity. The presented in-plane integration of a III-V heterostructure p-i-n diode self-aligned to a Si waveguide represent a new paradigm for densely integrated hybrid III-V/Si photonics schemes. By using the same approach for the integration of the detector and the emitter and an integration technique which enables heterojunctions along the growth direction, this approach can also be extended to an all-optical high-speed link on Si without the need for evanescent coupling.
Methods
Device fabrication. First, a conventional SOI substrate with top Si thickness of 220 nm is prepared which defines the thickness of the III-V device (Fig. 1a(1)). Then, the top silicon layer was patterned by a combination of e-beam lithography using hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) resist and hydrogen bromide (HBr) dry etching of silicon, forming the features of the future waveguides and grating couplers (Fig. 1a(2)). The silicon features were then embedded in a uniform SiO2 layer which in the following steps serves as the oxide template for the III-V growth. An opening was then made to expose the Si where the selectively back -etch using Tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) starts, exposing at one extremity a silicon seed (Fig. 1a(3)). In the next step, the III-V profile was grown within the template by MOCVD (Fig. 1a(4)). Following the growth, the top oxide was etched further down to the III-V material and
17

the metal contacts were implemented by E-beam lithography and lift-off of Ni-Au metal (Fig. 1a(5)).
Material characterization. To investigate the device architecture and material quality, a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) lamella was prepared using an FEI Helios Nanolab 450S focused ion beam (FIB). The cut was conducted along the growth direction on a 350 nm straight-type device. The lamella was then investigated by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) with a double spherical aberration-corrected JEOL JEM-ARM200F microscope operated at 200 kV, which permitted to assess the crystalline quality of the various III-V regions and the Si seed. The EDS element mapping and species quantification were carried out using the commercial Gatan Micrograph Suite ® (GMS 3) software by assuming the lamella thickness of about 100 nm and using the theoretical k -factors for the quantification.
Thermal characterization. Thermal effects of the photodiodes were investigated by scanning thermal microscopy (SThM), which is performed in a high-vacuum (<10-6 mbar) chamber at room temperature in the Noise-free labs at IBM Research [43]. The SThM-based technique relies on a micro-cantilever with integrated resistive sensor coupled to the silicon tip, which enables temperature measurements with down to few nanometer spatial resolution and sub-10 mK temperature resolution [44]. The temperature of the tip T = 267 °C is known by detecting the lever voltage and was calibrated before the scan when the tip is out of contact. The scan is operated in contact mode whereby the contact force is monitored and controlled by a laser deflection system. The temperature of the sample was modulated by applying an AC voltage with frequency of f =1 kHz on the device. A series resistance of 10 k was used during the measurement. The local temperature on the sample is thermally coupled through the tip to a resistive sensor integrated in the silicon MEMS cantilever. The change of the sensor temperature leads to the change of the electrical resistance of the cantilever, which is tracked
18

using a Wheatstone bridge circuit. Details on the setup can be found in the supplementary material (see Fig. S1 and equation (1)).
Thermal simulation. Thermal simulations were carried out using commercial finite element method software (Ansys Mechanical APDL), which uses Fourier's law of heat conduction to calculate the heat flow. When simulatingdevice operation as emitter, a uniform heat generation was applied on the III-V region with a total heat power equal to the electrical power applied while doing the SThM measurement. In the simulation, the back side of the Si substrate is assumed to be at a constant temperature of 300 K. For device operation as detector, a Gaussiandistributed heat generation was applied on the III-V region, which simulates a laser spot with a spot size of 1 µm. Only heat conduction was accounted for in the simulations since heat convection and radiation can be neglected considering the measurement conditions and temperature increase.
Electroluminescence spectroscopy. The electroluminescence (EL) measurements were performed under CW operation from 80 K to 300 K. The device was placed in a cryostat with 4 probes and with capability of cooling down to 10 K. An Agilent 1500A was used as both device parameter analyzer and power supply. The light emission is collected from the freespace with a 100× objective and detected by an InGaAs line array detector (Princeton Instruments, PyLoN-IR 1.7) which is combined with a grid diffraction spectrometer (Princeton SP-2500i). An integration time of 30 s was used to get high signal-to-noise ratio. The layout of the setup can be found in supplementary Fig. S2.
High-speed detection. Responsivity and high-speed measurements were performed in an optical setup with an optical fiber. For bandwidth measurements, a CW tone was generated using a 70 GHz Keysight Synthesizer and modulated onto a 1320 nm optical carrier. The system frequency response was calibrated using a commercial 67 GHz u2t photodiode. For the
19

data transmission, an electrical data signal was first generated u sing a Mircram 100GSa/s digital to analog converter (DAC). The output of the DAC was then amplified using a SHF driver amplifier (DA) with 3dB bandwidth of 55 GHz. A u2t Mach-Zehnder modulator was used to transfer the electrical signal to the 1320 nm optical carrier generated with a Keysight tunable laser source (TLS). In the next step, the optical signal was amplified to the optimum power using a FiberLabs Praseodymium doped fiber amplifer (PDFA). High-speed RF probes were used to extract the RF signal from the device under test (DUT) and a reverse bias voltage of ­1.5 V was supplied to the DUT using a SHF bias tee. At the receiver, an Agilent 160GSa/s digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) was used to record the generated RF signal. A 30 cm RF cable was used to connect the DSO to the bias tee, limiting the frequency response of the full system. An offline digital signal processingwas used to process the recorded signal. The digital signal processing setup comprisesof signal normalization, timingrecovery, linear equalization, and non-linear equalization (see details in supplementary Fig. S3).
References
1. Hashem, I. A. T. et al. The rise of "bigdata" on cloud computing: Review and open research issues. Inf. Syst. 47, 98-115 (2015).
2. Khilo, A. et al. Photonic ADC: overcoming the bottleneck of electronic jitter. Opt. Express 20, 4454-4469 (2012).
3. Miller, D. A. B. Attojoule optoelectronics for low-energy information processing and communications. J. Lightwave Technol. 35, 346 -396 (2017).
4. Salamin, Y. et al. 100 GHz plasmonic photodetector. ACS photonics 5, 3291-3297 (2018). 5. Michel, J., Liu, J. & Kimerling, L. C. High-performance Ge-on-Si photodetectors. Nat.
Photon. 4, 527-534 (2010).
20

6. Gyger, S. et al. Reconfigurable photonics with on-chip single-photon detectors. Nat. Commun. 12, 1408 (2021).
7. Awschalom, D. et al. Development of quantum interconnects (QuICs) for next generation information technologies. PRX QUANTUM 2, 017002 (2021).
8. Baumgartner, Y. et al. High-speed CMOS-compatible III-V on Si membrane photodetectors. Opt. Express 29, 509-516 (2021).
9. Thourhout, D. V. et al. III-V on-silicon sources for optical interconnect applications. IEEE Photonics Conference, San Diego, CA, USA, 186-187 (2014).
10. Fang, A. W. et al. Electrically pumped hybrid AlGaInAs-silicon evanescent laser. Opt. Express 14, 9203-9210 (2006).
11. Elshaari, A. W., Pernice, W., Srinivasan, K., Benson, O. & Zwiller, V. Hybrid integrated quantum photonic circuits. Nat. Photon. 14, 285-298 (2020).
12. Liang, D., Roelkens, G., Baets R. & Bowers, J. E. Hybrid integrated platforms for silicon photonics. Materials 3, 1782-1802 (2010).
13. Takiguchi, M. et al. Hybrid nanowire photodetector integrated in a silicon photonic crystal. ACS Photonics 7, 3467-3473 (2020).
14. Dai, X. et al. GaAs/AlGaAs nanowire photodetector. Nano Lett. 14, 2688-2693 (2014). 15. Minot, E. D. et al. Single quantum dot nanowire LEDs. Nano Lett. 7, 367-371 (2007). 16. Yang, I. et al. Multiwavelength single nanowire InGaAs/InP quantum well light-emitting
diodes. Nano Lett. 19, 3821-3829 (2019). 17. Claudon, J. et al. A highly efficient single-photon source based on a quantum dot in a
photonic nanowire. Nat. Photon. 4, 174-177 (2010). 18. Chen, R. et al. Nanophotonicintegrated circuits from nanoresonators grown on silicon. Nat.
Commun. 5, 4325 (2014).
21

19. Takiguchi, M. et al. Hybrid nanowire photodetector integrated in a silicon photonic crystal. ACS Photonics 7, 3467-3473 (2020).
20. Miao, J. et al. Single InAs nanowire room-temperature near-infrared photodetectors. ACS Nano 8, 3628-3635 (2014).
21. Schmid, H. et al. Template-assisted selective epitaxy of III-V nanoscale devices for coplanar heterogeneous integration with Si. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 233101 (2015).
22. Borg, M. et al. Facet-selective group-III incorporation in InGaAs templete assisted selective epitaxy. Nanotechnology 30, 084004 (2019).
23. Borg, M. et al. High-mobility GaSb nanostructures cointegrated with InAs on Si. ACS Nano 11, 2554-2560 (2017).
24. Cutaia, D. et al. Complementary III-V heterojunction lateral NW tunnel FET technology on Si. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology, Honolulu, HI, 2016, pp. 1 -2 (2016).
25. Czornomaz, L. et al. Confined epitaxial lateral overgrowth (CELO): A novel concept for scalable integration of CMOS-compatible InGaAs-on-insulator MOSFET on large-area Si substrates. In 2015 Symposium on VLSI Technology, pp. T172-173 (2015).
26. Wirths, S. et al. Room-temperature lasing from monolithically integrated GaAs microdisks on silicon. ACS Nano 12, 2169-2175 (2018).
27. Mauthe, S. et al. Hybrid III-V silicon photonic crystal cavity emitting at telecom wavelengths. Nano Lett. 20, 8768-8772 (2020).
28. Mauthe, S. et al. InP-on-Si optically pumped microdisk lasers via monolithic growth and wafer bonding. IEEE J. of Sel. Top. In Quantum Electron. 25, 8300507 (2019).
29. Mauthe, S. et al. High-Speed III-V Nanowire Photodetector Monolithically Integrated on Si. Nat. Commun. 11, 4565 (2020).
22

30. Amiri, I. S. et al. Temperature effects on characteristics and performance of near-infared wide bandwidth for different avalanche photodiodes structures. Results in Physics 14, 102399 (2019).
31. Brunelli, S. T. et al. Horizontal heterojunction integration via template-assisted selective epitaxy. Cryst. Growth Des. 19, 7030-7035 (2019).
32. Brunelli, S. T. et al. Selective and confined epitaxial growth development for novel nanoscale electronic and photonic device structures. J. Appl. Phys. 126, 015703 (2019).
33. Bologna, N. et al. Dopant-induced modifications of GaxIn1-xP nanowire-based p-n junctions monolithically integrated on Si(111). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 3258832596 (2018).
34. Borg, M. et al. Facet-selective group-III incorporation in InGaAs template assisted selective epitaxy. Nanotechnology 30, 084004 (2019).
35. Menges, F. et al. Temperature mapping of operating nanoscale devices by scanning probe thermometry. Nat. Commun. 7, 10874 (2016).
36. Tiwari, P. et al. Scaling of metal-clad InP nanodisk lasers: optical performance and thermal effects. Opt. Express 29, 3915-3927 (2021).
37. Williams, K. J. & Esman, R. D. Design considerations for high-current photodetectors. J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 1443­1454 (1999).
38. Williams, K. J., Esman, R. D. & Dagenais, M. Effects of high space-charge fields on the fesponse of microwave photodetectors. IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 6, 639­641 (1994).
39. Baumgartner, Y. et al. High-speed CMOS-compatible III-V on Si membrane photodetectors. Opt. Express 29, 509-516 (2021).
40. El-Fiky, E. et al. First demonstration of a 400 Gb/s 4 CWDM TOSA for datacenter optical interconnects. Opt. Express 26, 19742 -19749 (2018).
23

41. Schuh, K. et al. Single Carrier 1.2 Tbit/s Transmission over 300 km with PM-64 QAM at 100 GBaud, In Optical Fiber Communication Conference Postdeadline Papers,OSA. paper Th5B.5 (2017).
42. Tiwari, P. et al. Butt-coupled III-V photodetector monolithically integrated on SOI with data reception at 50 Gbps OOK. In Optical Fiber Communication Conference, OSA. Paper F2C.2 (2021).
43. Menges, F., Riel, H., Stemmer, A. & Gotsmann, B. Nanoscale thermometry by scanning thermal microscopy. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 87, 074902 (2016).
44. Lörtscher, E., Widmer, D. & Gotsmann, B. Next-generation nanotechnology laboratories with simultaneous reduction of all relevant disturbances. Nanoscale 5,10542-9 (2013).
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the European Union H2020 ERC Starting Grant project PLASMIC (Grant Agreement #678567) and H2020MSCA IF project DATENE (Grant Agreement #844541). We also acknowledge Y. Baumgartner and M. Seifried for design of the grating couplers, as well as L. Czornomaz, A. Schenk and V. Georgiev for technical discussions. We gratefully acknowledge technical support for CMP from Daniele Caimi and we thank the Cleanroom Operations Team of the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology Center (BRNC) for their help and support.
Author contribution
S. M. designed the devices and waveguides, S.M., P. T. and P. W. fabricated the devices. S. M. and H. S. conducted the material growth. P. W. and M. S. prepared focused ion beam lamella and performed material characterization. P. W. and B. G. performed the thermal analysis. P. W and M. Sc. performed the emission characterization. P. W., P. T., M. B. and B.
24

I. B. performed the detection characterization. P. W. and K. M. wrote the article with contribution from all authors. K. M. led the project.
25

