arXiv:2106.00364v1 [hep-lat] 1 Jun 2021

SU(N) gauge theories in 3+1 dimensions: glueball spectrum, string tensions and topology
Andreas Athenodoroua,b and Michael Teperc,d
a Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Pisa and INFN, Sezione di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
b Computation-based Science and Technology Research Center, The Cyprus Institute, 20 Kavafi Str., Nicosia 2121, Cyprus
cRudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
dAll Souls College, University of Oxford, High Street, Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
Abstract
We calculate the low-lying glueball spectrum, several string tensions and some properties of topology and the running coupling for SU(N) lattice gauge theories in 3 + 1 dimensions. We do so for 2  N  12, using lattice simulations with the Wilson plaquette action, and for glueball states in all the representations of the cubic rotation group, for both values of parity and charge conjugation. We extrapolate these results to the continuum limit of each theory and then to N = . For a number of these states we are able to identify their continuum spins with very little ambiguity. We calculate the fundamental string tension and k = 2 string tension and investigate the N dependence of the ratio. Using the string tension as the scale, we calculate the running of a lattice coupling and confirm that g2(a)  1/N for constant physics as N  . We fit our calculated values of a  with the 3-loop function, and extract a value for MS, in units of the string tension, for all our values of N, including SU(3). We use these fits to provide analytic formulae for estimating the string tension at a given lattice coupling. We calculate the topological charge Q for N  6 where it fluctuates sufficiently for a plausible estimate of the continuum topological susceptibility. We also calculate the renormalisation of the lattice topological charge, ZQ(), for all our SU(N) gauge theories, using a standard definition of the charge, and we provide interpolating formulae, which may be useful in estimating the renormalisation of the lattice  parameter. We provide quantitative results for how the topological charge `freezes' with decreasing lattice spacing and with increasing N. Although we are able to show that within our typical errors our glueball and string tension results are insensitive to the freezing of Q at larger N and , we choose to perform our calculations with a typical distribution of Q imposed upon the fields so as to further reduce any potential systematic errors.
E-mail: athenodorou.andreas@ucy.ac.cy, mike.teper@physics.ox.ac.uk

Contents

1 Introduction

2

2 Calculating on a lattice

3

2.1 lattice setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2.2 energies and correlators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2.3 systematic errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

2.4 topological freezing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

3 String tensions

9

3.1 finite volume corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

3.2 fundamental (k = 1) string tensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3.3 k = 2 string tensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3.4 N   extrapolations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

4 Running coupling

14

4.1 scaling with N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

4.2 perturbative running and MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 4.3 interpolating and extrapolating functions for a() . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

5 Glueball masses

19

5.1 quantum numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

5.2 finite volume effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

5.3 lattice masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

5.4 continuum masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

5.5 N   extrapolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

5.6 continuum spins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

5.7 scattering states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

6 Topological fluctuations

34

6.1 topology and cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

6.2 tunneling between topological sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

6.3 topological susceptibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

6.4 ZQ() and lattice  parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

7 Conclusions

43

A Lattice running couplings

45

B Scattering states

48

1

1 Introduction
In this paper we calculate various physical properties of SU(N) gauge theories in 3 + 1 dimensions. We do so by performing calculations in the corresponding lattice gauge theories over a sufficient range of lattice spacings, a, and with enough precision that we can obtain plausible continuum extrapolations. We also wish to be able to extrapolate to the theoretically interesting N =  limit and to compare this to the physically interesting SU(3) theory. To do so we have performed our calculations for N = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 gauge theories.
Our main aim is to provide a calculation of the low-lying `glueball' mass spectrum for all quantum numbers and all N. This means calculating the lowest states in all the representions, R, of the rotation group of a cubic lattice, and for both values of parity P and charge conjugation parity C. We also calculate the confining string tension, , so as to provide a useful scale for the glueball masses. As a side-product we calculate the k-string tensions, k, of k = 2, 3, 4 flux tubes as well. In our lattice calculations we vary the lattice spacing a by varying the lattice coupling, g2, and since the latter is the bare coupling it provides us with a particular definition of a running coupling g2(a) on the length scale a. Our calculations of the string tension a2 as a function of a then allow us to attempt a perturbative renormalisation group fit which leads to estimates of the scale parameter MS for all our SU(N ) gauge theories. All these lattice calculations are performed using standard Monte Carlo simulations and we address in detail the rapid loss of topological ergodicity as a becomes small and N becomes large. As a by-product we perform calculations of the topological susceptibility and some properties of topology on the lattice for various N.
Our calculations of the glueball spectrum are intended to improve significantly upon previous work. In comparison with the calculations in [1, 2] our calculations extend to smaller lattice spacings, making the extrapolation to the continuum limit more reliable, and to larger N, making the extrapolation to N =  more reliable. Also, we calculate glueballs with all quantum numbers RP C, as well as the low-lying excitations, which enables us to assign continuum JP C quantum numbers to many of the states. We remark that something similar has been done in [3] but limited to a fixed lattice spacing, rather than taking the continuum limit, and over a slightly smaller range of N.
These kind of calculations are of course standard in the case of SU(3), see for example [4, 5, 6, 8, 7, 9, 10], and we have attempted to bring the SU(N) calculations towards a similar level of sophistication. The computational cost of performing calculations at larger N means that further improvement to our work is still desirable. In this context it would be very interesting to see the existing calculations of the string tension and the meson spectrum at very large N using space-time reduction [11] extended to calculations of the glueball spectrum, just as they have been for 2 + 1 dimensions [12].
The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section we introduce our lattice setup and describe how we calculate energies from correlators. We discuss some of the main systematic errors affecting these calculations and how we deal with them, with a particular focus on how we deal with the rapid loss of tunneling between sectors of differing topology. In Section 3 we describe in detail our calculation of the confining string tension, , which we will later use as the physical scale in which to express our glueball masses. As a side product we also calculate
2

the string tensions, k, of the lightest flux tubes carrying 2  k  4 units of fundamental flux. Our calculations of k=2 are the most reliable of these and in Section 3.4 we study the approach of the ratio k=2/ to the N =  limit so as to address the old controversy concerning the power of 1/N of the leading correction. In Section 4 we show how our precise calculation as a function of the lattice coupling of the fundamental string tension in lattice units, a2, enables us to confirm the usual large-N counting for g2, and motivate perturbative fits that allow us, in Section 4.2, to estimate a value for MS as a function of N . We also provide, in Section 4.3, some analytic interpolation/extrapolation functions for the variation of the string tension with the coupling, which may be of use in other calculations. We then turn, in Section 5, to our main calculation in this paper, which is that of the low-lying glueball spectrum. We calculate the masses on the lattice, extrapolate to the continuum limit, and then extrapolate to N = . Although these states are classified according to the representations of the rotation subgroup of our cubic lattice, we are able to identify the continuum spins in many cases, as described in Section 5.6. In doing all this we need to address the problem of the extra states that winding modes introduce into the glueball spectrum and also the possible presence of multi-glueball 'scattering' states. We then return, in Section 6, to some of the properties of the topological fluctuations in our lattice fields. After illustrating in Section 6.1 how our cooling algorithm reproduces the topological charge of a lattice field, we calculate in Section 6.2 the rate of topological freezing with increasing N and with decreasing a() and compare our results to the simplest theoretical expectations. In Section 6.3 we provide our results for the topological susceptibility in the continuum limit of SU(N  6) gauge theories and in the N   limit. Then, in Section 6.4, we calculate the multiplicative renormalisation of our lattice topological charge for each SU(N) group and provide interpolating formulae which may be useful in calculations with a  parameter in the lattice action. Section 7 summarises our main results.
Finally we remark that in parallel with the present calculations most of our SU(3) calculations, which are of particular physical interest, have recently been published separately [10].

2 Calculating on a lattice
2.1 lattice setup
We work on hypercubic lattices of size L3sLt with lattice spacing a and with periodic boundary conditions on the fields. The Euclidean time extent, aLt, is always chosen large enough that we are in the confining phase of the theory, at a temperature that is well below the deconfining phase transition [13]. Our fields are SU(N) matrices, Ul, assigned to the links l of the lattice. The Euclidean path integral is

Z = DU exp{-S[U]},

(1)

3

where DU is the Haar measure and we use the standard plaquette action,

S = 

1

-

1 N

ReTrUp

p

;



=

2N gL2

.

(2)

Here Up is the ordered product of link matrices around the plaquette p. We write  = 2N/gL2 since in this way we recover the usual continuum action when we take the continuum limit of the lattice theory and replace gL2  g2. The subscript L reminds us that this coupling is defined in a specific coupling scheme corresponding to the lattice and the plaquette action. Since gL2 is the bare coupling corresponding to a short distance cut-off a, it provides a definition of the running coupling gL2 (a) = gL2 on the length scale a. Since the theory is asymptotically free gL2 (a)  0 as a  0 and hence    as a  0 and so we can decrease the cut-off a and so approach the desired continuum limit of the theory by increasing . Our calculations of this lattice path integral are carried out via a standard Monte Carlo using a mixture of
Cabibbo-Marinari heat bath and over-relaxation sweeps through the lattice. We typically perform  2 × 106 sweeps at each value of  at each lattice size, and we typically calculate correlators every  25 sweeps and the topological charge every 50 or 100 sweeps. Naturally we
choose values of  that place us on the weak coupling branch of the lattice theory; the `bulk' transition that separates weak coupling from strong coupling, becomes a first order transition
for N  5 [14]. We simulate SU(N) lattice gauge theories for N = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 over a range of
values of  so as to be able to plausibly obtain, by extrapolation, the glueball spectra and
string tensions of the corresponding continuum gauge theories. A summary of the basic parameters of our calculations is given in Tables 1-8. For each of our SU(N) calculations we show the values of , the lattice sizes, the average plaquette, the string tension, a2, and the mass gap, amG. In the header of each table we show the approximate spatial size in units of the string tension. Since finite volume corrections are expected to decrease with increasing N
we decrease the lattice volume as we increase N. This expectation needs to be confirmed by explicit calculations which we shall provide in Section 5.2.

2.2 energies and correlators

We calculate energies from correlation functions in the standard way. Suppose we wish to calculate glueball masses in some representation RP C. If one picks an operator (t) with quantum numbers RP C and momentum p = 0 then the correlator will provide us with the
energies Ei of states with those quantum numbers

C(t) = (t)(0) = |cn|2 exp{-Ent} t- |c0|2 exp{-E0t},

(3)

n=0

where En  En+1 and E0 is the lightest state with RP C quantum numbers ­ which will often be the lightest glueball in that sector. (If  has vacuum quantum numbers then one uses the
vacuum subtracted operator.) Since on the lattice time is measured in lattice units, t = ant, what we obtain is the value, aE0, of the mass in lattice units. If we calculate two masses,

4

aM and aµ, in this way then the lattice spacing drops out of the ratio and if we calculate

the ratio for several values of a() we can extrapolate to the continuum limit in the standard

way, using

aM (a) aµ(a)

=

M (a) µ(a)



M (0) µ(0)

+

ca2µ2

(4)

once a() is small enough. (This standard tree level extrpolation could be improved with perturbative corrections [15] and with higher order power corrections but our calculations are not so extensive and precise as to motivate such modifications.)
The starting point for an operator  is the trace of a closed loop on the lattice. For an operator that projects onto glueballs the loop should be contractible. A non-contractible loop that closes across the periodic spatial boundary will project onto a confining flux tube that winds around that spatial torus. For the contractible glueball loop one takes a suitable linear combination of rotations of that loop for it to be in the desired representation R of the lattice rotation group and together with the parity inverse this allows us to form an operator with parity P . The real and imaginary parts of the original loop will correspond to C = + and C = - respectively. Summing this linear combination over all spatial sites at time t gives us the operator with p = 0.
The statistical errors on C(t) are roughly independent of t while its value decreases exponentially with t, so if we are to estimate aE0 from C(t) in eqn(3) we need to be able to do this at small t. (The fluctuations of (t)(0) involve the higher order correlator ((t)(0))2 which typically has a vacuum channel and this is independent of t.) For this to be possible we need the operator  to have a large overlap onto the state |n = 0 that corresponds to E0, i.e. that |c0|2/ n |cn|2  1. One can achieve this using iteratively `blocked' link matrices and loops [16, 17] as described in detail in, for example, [2]. To monitor the approach of C(t) to the asymptotic exponential decay in eqn(3) it is useful to define an effective energy

C (ant ) C(a(nt - 1))

=

exp{-aEeff (nt)}.

(5)

(In practice we use a cosh modification of this definition to take into account the periodicity
in the temporal direction.) If, within errors, aEeff (nt) = const for nt  n~t then we can use aEeff (n~t) as an estimate for aE0, or we can do a simple exponential fit to C(t) for nt  n~t - 1 to estimate aE0.
To calculate not just the ground state energy but also some usefully precise excited state
energies from C(t) in eqn(3) would require a precision that is at present unachievable. Instead
the standard strategy is to use a variational calculation. One chooses some basis of n0 operators {i(t) : i = 1, .., n0}, calculates the cross-correlators Cij(t) = i (t)j(0) and finds the linear combination,  = 0, that maximises C(t) = (t)(0) for some suitable small t = t0. This is then our best estimate of the wave-functional of the ground state |n = 0 . We then extract aE0 from the asymptotic exponential decay of C(t) = 0(t)0(0) . To calculate the first excited energy aE1 we consider the subspace of {i : i = 1, .., n0} that is orthogonal to 0 and repeat the above steps. This gives our best estimate 1 for |n = 1 and we estimate aE1 from the asymptotic exponential decay of the correlator of 1(t). Similarly by considering the

5

subspace of the operator vector space that is orthogonal to 0 and 1 we can obtain estimates for the next excited state and so on. As with any variational calculation, the accuracy of such estimates will depend on having a large enough basis of operators.
2.3 systematic errors
In addition to the statistical errors in the calculation of energies and masses, which can be estimated quite reliably, there are systematic errors that are harder to control. We will now briefly point to some of these, leaving a more detailed discussion till later on.
Since the error to signal ratio on C(nt) increases at least as fast as  exp{+aE0nt}, the range of nt which is useful rapidly decreases when the energy aE0 increases, and an obvious systematic error is that we begin our fit of the asymptotic exponential decay at too small a value of t = ant. Given the positivity properties of our correlators, this means that as the true value of E0 increases, so does our overestimate of its value. For any particular state this problem will become less severe as we decrease a, and this provides some check on this error.
The correlator of an excited state, using our best variational choice of operator, may contain small contributions from lighter excitations since our basis is far from complete. So at large enough nt these will dominate the correlator and the effective mass will drop below that of the mass of the state of interest. This does not appear to be a severe problem for us because the pattern of our statistical errors, which grow rapidly with nt, prevents us from obtaining values at large nt. In any case we attempt to identify at most an intermediate effective mass plateau from which we extract the desired mass.
If a state has too small an overlap onto our basis of operators then, given the exponential growth with t of the statistical error on the effective energy, the state will be, at best, assigned a mass that is much too high and so it will typically not appear in its correct order in the mass spectrum. If so this means that there will be a missing state in our calculated glueball spectrum and this will not be helpful if, for example, one wishes to check theoretical models of the spectrum against the lattice spectrum. To reduce the possibility of this occurring one needs to use a large basis of operators, just as in any variational calculation.
The states we are primarily interested in are single particle glueball states rather than multi-glueball scattering states. (In our finite spatial volume multiglueball states are interacting at all times but for simplicity we refer to them as scattering states.) We use single trace operators which should ensure that at large N our correlators receive no multi-glueball contributions but this is not necessarily the case at smaller N. This is of course related to the fact that at smaller N heavier glueball states may have substantial decay widths. Later in the paper we will provide an exploratory analysis of this issue by combining single and double trace operators.
The spectrum in a finite spatial volume will differ from the spectrum in an infinite volume. One type of correction to a glueball propagator comes, for example, from a virtual glueball loop where one line of the two in the loop encircles the spatial torus. Such corrections are exponentially small in, typically, MGL where MG is the mass gap (the lightest scalar glueball) and L is the spatial size [18]. These corrections will be very small in our calculations. For the intermediate volumes on which we work a much more relevant finite volume correction
6

comes from a confining flux tube that winds once around one of the spatial tori. Such a flux tube is often referred to as a torelon. By itself a torelon has zero overlap onto local particle states. However a state composed of two torelons, where one is conjugated, will in general have a nonzero overlap. Such a `ditorelon' will not only shift the energies of the usual particle glueballs but will introduce extra states into the glueball spectrum. These extra states can be identified through their volume dependence and in some other ways as we shall see later on.
In addition to the usual gradual loss of ergodicity as the lattice spacing decreases, the tunnelling between sectors of differing topological charge Q suffers a much more rapid supression not only as a  0 at fixed N but also as N increases at fixed a. This affects a large part of our calculations and we discuss next how we deal with it in practice.
2.4 topological freezing
In a periodic four-volume a continuum gauge field of topological charge Q cannot be smoothly deformed into a gauge field of charge Q = Q. So in a sequence of lattice fields that have been generated using a Monte Carlo algorithm that is local any change in the value of Q should be increasingly suppressed as we approach the continuum limit. This statement can be made quantitative as we do below. But before that we note that there is a separate suppression that occurs at any fixed small value of a when we increase N. To smoothly deform a lattice field from, say, Q = 1 to Q = 0 in a finite volume with periodic gauge potentials, the core of an original extended instanton must gradually shrink until it disappears within a hypercube, leaving a simple gauge singularity centered on that hypercube. Before it does so it will be a small instanton (assuming a is small) which we can describe using standard semiclassical methods. So its effective action will be SI()  82/g2() where  is the size of the core and provides the relevant scale, and the probability of it existing in a field will be  exp{-SI()}  exp{-82/g2()} per unit volume up to a 1/4 volume factor and some less important factors [19, 20]. Now at large N the 't Hooft coupling  = g2N needs to be kept constant for a smooth limit [21, 22]. In terms of the running coupling this means (l) = g2(l)N is independent of N up to corrections that are powers of 1/N, where l is measured in some physical units, e.g. the mass gap. So the weight of a small instanton vanishes as  exp{-82N/()}, i.e. it vanishes exponentially with N [24, 25]. Since the process of going `smoothly' from a field with Q = 1 to a field with Q = 0 necessarily involves at an intermediate stage of the process the presence of fields containing such small instantons, we immediately infer that the change in topology must be at least exponentially suppressed with increasing N once a is small. Such a strong suppression has indeed been observed in earlier lattice calculations [1, 26]. Returning to the a  0 limit at fixed N we note that one can use the one-loop expression for g2() and this leads to a suppression of the tunnelling between topological sectors that is the appropriate power of  and hence of a, once   O(a).
In our calculations we normally start a Monte Carlo sequence with the the trivial Q = 0 gauge field Ul = I, l, and `thermalise' with some tens of thousands of sweeps to reach the `equilibriated' lattice gauge fields which we can begin to use for our calculations. For larger N and smaller a the topological tunnelling can become sufficiently rare that the fields remain at Q = 0 even after our attempted equilibriation. This loss of topological ergodicity may then
7

affect our calculated spectra. We shall examine this issue in more detail later in this paper. For now we mention that in practice this proves not to be an issue for any of our SU(2), SU(3), SU(4) and SU(5) calculations. For SU(6) it is a problem for the smaller values of a and for SU(N  8) it is a problem for all but our largest values of a. We deal with this as follows. Suppose we are confronted with this problem of topological freezing on a lattice of size L3sLt at some value of  in some SU(N ) theory. Now instead of starting with a Q = 0 field with Ul = I, l, we produce a set of sequences in parallel which start with fields that have various values of Q. We choose the ensemble of these starting fields to roughly reproduce the expected distribution. What is `expected' we infer from what we observe at the lower values of N where there is no topological freezing and also from the values obtained at the same value of N but at the larger values of a() (if any) where the freezing has not yet set in. This is a plausible strategy since we find that in those cases where the distribution of Q can be determined there is little variation in the distribution of Q with either N or a on an equal physical volume. To produce such a starting field with some Q we generate a sequence of SU(3) fields on the same size lattice as our SU(N) one and we pick out a field with the desired charge Q. We `cool' this field to produce a field with minimal fluctuations apart from the net topological charge. (See Section 6 for details.) We then embed this lattice field of 3 ×3 complex matrices into a suitable corner of our set of N × N unit matrices, so as to produce a set of SU(N) matrices with charge Q. If we have topological freezing then this starting distribution of Q will be maintained in our set of Monte Carlo sequences.
This method has some disadvantages but also some advantages. One advantage is that the lack of topological tunneling is a better representation of the continuum theory: we are sampling disconnected sectors. After all, the field configurations near the point of topological tunnelling have no continuum correspondence and are a lattice artifact. The major disadvantage is that we necessarily have a rather limited set of parallel sequences (typically 20 or 40) and hence values of Q, and so only the most probable values of Q are properly represented. Lattice fields with values of Q that have a low probability simply do not appear. It is plausible that the physics we are interested in is not influenced by the tail of the Q distribution, but any physics that depends on higher moments of Q will be and so is not something we can address here. It is also worth noting that the freezing at large N is less worrisome: current theory [27] tells us that we are sitting in a vacuum with periodicity in the  parameter of 2N rather than 2. (It is other interlaced -vacua that provide the expected 2 periodicity.) That is to say, higher moments in Q disappear as inverse powers of N. Lattice calculations support this expectation [28].
Although in our calculations in this paper we will take the precautions outlined above to minimise any effects of topological freezing, it is useful and interesting to perform an explicit check of how such freezing may affect the physics we are interested in. For this we choose to work in SU(8) at  = 45.50 where changes in topology are extremely rare. We begin with a comparison of two sets of about 2 × 106 fields on a 14320 lattice, with glueball and flux tube `measurements' taken every 25'th update. One set of fields has Q = 0 throughout while the other has what one expects to be the correct distribution of Q imposed through about 40 different starting configurations as described above. We calculate glueball and flux tube correlators in exactly the same way in both ensembles of fields and perform the usual
8

variational calculation for each representation RP C. Note that here we include all the states that we obtain and make no attempt to identify any of the finite volume ditorelon states alluded to in Section 2.3. In most, but not all, cases the effective energy plateau in the effective energies, aEeff (t), defined in eqn(5) begin at t = 2a. So we show in Table 9 the values of aEeff (t = 2a) that we obtain in each of the the two sets of fields, for the ground states and some of the lowest lying excited states. We see that the two sets of values are remarkably consistent within errors, with only a small handful of heavier states differing by slightly more than 2. In addition to the glueball effective energies we also show those for the lightest two states of a flux tube that winds around the spatial torus. We do so for the flux in the fundamental representation (k = 1) and for the flux in the (k = 2) = (k = 1)  (k = 1) representation. Here too we see consistency within statistical errors. In addition to this study on the 14320 lattice we perform a similar one on a smaller 12320 lattices at the same . This is the lattice size, in physical units, that is used in our calculations later on in this paper, and we recall that in general the local effects of constraining the topological charge should increase with decreasing volume (see e.g. [29]). Here, in Table 10, we provide our actual energy estimates rather than the effective energy at t = 2a. (In almost all cases the numbers are similar.) Again we have consistency within errors for almost all the states.
The conclusion of our explicit calculations is that within our typical statistical errors the physical quantities we calculate in this paper are not affected by constraining the total topological charge to Q = 0. The fact that we will, in addition, impose a `normal' distribution of Q on those ensembles where there are almost no fluctuations of Q makes us confident that any systematic bias from the freezing of topology is negligible in our calculations.

3 String tensions

Let us label the sites of the hypercubic lattice by the integers nx, ny, nz, nt. To project onto a fundamental (k = 1) flux tube the simplest operator we can use is Tr(lf ) where lf is the product of link matrices along a minimal path encircling the spatial torus. This is just the usual spatial Polyakov loop. For example, if the spatial lattice size is L then the Polyakov loop in the x direction is

nx=L

lf (ny, nz, nt) =

Ux(nx, ny, nz, nt).

(6)

nx=1

We also use such Polyakov loops composed of blocked links and we translate the operator along the x direction. Clearly the parities of such states are positive. This loop is translationally invariant along the flux tube direction and so the momentum along the flux tube is zero; p = 0. It is rotationally invariant around its axis, so J = 0. Because of the usual centre symmetry (see below) the C = + and C = - flux tubes are degenerate. We then sum lf (ny, nz, nt) over ny and nz so that the transverse momentum p = 0. Thus the lightest state onto which this final operator projects should be the ground state of the winding flux tube that carries fundamental flux. To project onto a k = 2 flux tube we do the same

9

using linear combinations of the operators Tr(lf lf ) and Tr(lf )Tr(lf ). For k = 3 we use linear combinations of Tr(lf lf lf ), Tr(lf lf )Tr(lf ) and Tr(lf )Tr(lf )Tr(lf ), and so on for higher k. The defining property of a k-string that winds around the spatial torus in say the x direction is that under a transformation of the link matrices Ux(nx, ny, nz, nt)  exp{i2/N }Ux(nx, ny, nz, nt) for all ny, nz, nt and at some fixed value of nx, it will acquire a factor exp{i2k/N }. Since this transformation is a symmetry of the theory (the action and measure are unchanged) and at low temperatures the symmetry is not spontaneously broken, any two operators for which this factor of exp{i2k/N} differ will have zero mutual overlap. So we have separate sectors of flux
tubes labelled by k with the fundamental k = 1 strings existing for N  2, the k = 2 strings for N  4, the k = 3 strings for N  6, and so on. We note that our basis of operators for a k-string could easily be extended by multiplying the operators by factors such as Tr(lf )Tr(lf ), but while this might be useful to improve the overlap onto massive excitations it would be very surprising if it improved the overlap onto the ground state which is what we are interested in
here.

3.1 finite volume corrections

As described above, we calculate the ground state energy of a flux tube that winds once around a spatial torus. If the lattice has size l3lt, this flux tube has length l and we generically denote the energy by Ek(l), where k = 1 corresponds to a flux tube carrying fundamental flux and k to a k-string (carrying k units of fundamental flux). The string tension k is the energy per unit length of a very long flux tube

k

=

lim
l

Ek(l) l

.

(7)

In practice our tori are finite and so we expect that there will be corrections to the leading linear dependence of Ek(l). In our calculations we will normally estimate the asymptotic string tension k using the `Nambu-Goto' formula

1

Ek(l) = kl

1

-

2 3k l2

2
.

(8)

When expanded in powers of 1/kl2 this formula generates all the known universal terms [30, 31, 32, 33] and, at least for fundamental flux, proves to accurately describe numerical calculations for the range of l relevant to our calculations [34]. However, strictly speaking, these results hold for flux tubes that are effectively in an infinite transverse volume, while in our case, in order to maintain the rotational symmetry needed for our glueball calculations, the transverse size is l × l and so decreases when we decrease l. We therefore need to perform some explicit checks, i.e. to check whether eqn(8) encodes all the finite-l corrections that are lvTihsiebWsleeesw2cs.aei6telehfsofinrraoroomeuulrreisqhttyniegpd(h8icei)naslttthshvataeatltuhiteeshtsaeidcoearfrelNsleeor.vrfaAonTrstas.bfsalcerasale1s-ig8slualenbidnatlulhnmeyitasvssaoerfsytafhrreeomcsotlrnicnegrnteedn4stfihooenr ,ltohiw.eeoe.rreNltictaol.

10

justification for this decrease in the volume is that we expect finite volume corrections to

decrease as N grows and the practical reason is that the expense of the SU(N) matrix product

calculations grows as  N3. In order to check whether there are significant corrections to

eqn(8) at the values of l we use, we calculate  on larger (sometimes smaller) lattices at

sseclaelceteld value2s.6ocforr.esTphoensdesctaolclu=lat1io2nisnatrheesTumabmlea,raisnedd

in we

Tseaeblteha1t1.thFeovraNlue=of8a, 10, 1i2s

the the

same for the longer l = 14 flux tube, suggesting that there are no significant finite l corrections

to eqn(8) for these values of N. The same conclusion holds for the other groups in Table 11.

All this provides evidence that the fundamental string tensions quoted in Tables 1-8 do not

suffer significant finite volume errors, at least within our typical statistical errors.

The energies of k  2 flux tubes are larger and therefore so are the statistical and systematic

errors in estimating them. Since the energies grow with k, we have only attempted a finite

volume study for k = 2 flux tubes. This is presented in Table 12. The message here is more

wnthuhaaetnncthelderethiasna3,fcoaornrrdkech=teion1nc:eowffohriloe1u.ar9n(N5y)%finti6toesttlhriecnogvrartleeucnetssiiooonnbstcataoinlceeudqlnawt(i8iot)nhsal,ptpheearre

to be insignificant is strong evidence 2.6, which are the

values we emply for N  8. This is something we will need to consider when we estimate the

errors on our k = 2 string tensions. Presumably the k = 3 and k = 4 string tensions show

corrections at least as large, but we do not have any finite l study of these.

3.2 fundamental (k = 1) string tensions

We calculate the ground state energies of the fundamental flux tube for the lattices, couplings

and gauge groups listed in Tables 1-8. We then use eqn(8) to extract our estimates of the

infinite volume string tensions. The energies are obtained by identifying effective energy

plateaux as described in Section 2.2. As an example we show in Fig.1 the effective energies

that lead to the SU(8) string tension estimates in Table 6. As one increases  and hence

decreases a, the energy in lattice units decreases so that we can obtain precise effective energies

over a larger range of nt which in turn makes it easier to identify a plateau and so estimate the

corresponding value of Eeff (nt  ). For the corresponding SU(3) plots we refer the reader

to Fig.1 of [10]. similar values of

aThe

fact that the SU(3) means that the flux

lattices are (much) larger tubes are more massive, so

than the SU(8) ones at the correlators decrease

faster with nt and the extraction of Eeff (nt  ) is less compelling ­ despite the fact that the calculations extend closer to the continuum limit in the case of SU(3). These SU(3) plots

are typical of our N  4 calculations, where the lattices are chosen to be particularly large,

while the SU(8) plot is typical of N  8 where the spatial volumes used are smaller.

In the case of SU(2) and SU(3) we have also calculated the string tension on smaller

volumes glueball

which are still large enough for the flux tube calculations. This enables us to extend the

calculations calculations

even if too small to smaller values

for of

areliabalet

modest computational cost. The purpose of these calculations is to feed into our analysis of the

running coupling later on in this paper. We list the results of the calculations in Tables 13,14.

As an example we show on Fig.2 the effective energy plots for SU(3). Comparing to Fig.1 of

[10] shows the practical advantage of working on these smaller lattices.

11

3.3 k = 2 string tensions

One expects that as N   the k = 2 flux tube will become two non-interacting k = 1 flux tubes and we will have k=2  2k=1. However, as earlier calculations have shown [35, 34, 26], at lower values of N one finds that k=2 is substantially less than 2k=1, so that one can think of it as behaving like a bound state of two fundamental flux tubes. This suggests that at lower values of N the k = 2 flux tube can be treated as a single `string' with finite volume corrections well described by eqn(8). As we increase N the k = 2 flux tube should increasingly look like two fundamental flux tubes that are loosely bound with the binding energy vanishing as N  . Here one might expect each of these two flux tubes to have finite volume corrections given by eqn(8) so that the overall finite volume behaviour of the energy of a k = 2 flux tube becomes significantly different:

1

1

Ek=2(l) sm=all N k=2l

1

-

2 3k=2l2

2 N- k=2l

1

-

4 3k=2l2

2

(9)

with k=2 = 2k=1. One can expect a smooth transition between these two behaviours which clearly creates ambiguities in extracting the string tension a2k=2 from the flux tube energy aEk=2(l).
In Fig. 3 we show some representative effective energy plots for k = 2 flux tubes in SU(4)

and SU(8). The reason that the SU(4) energies are larger than the SU(8) ones is that

tmhaesysihvaev; etybpeiecnalloybtlainedo4n

larger lattices, so for SU(4) versus

lthat

the flux tubes are longer and hence more  2.6 for SU(8). It is clear that one can

reliably identify effective energy plateaux, particularly as  increases and one approaches the

continuum limit.

Assuming for now that we can treat the k = 2 flux tube as a single string with finite volume

corrections as given by eqn(8) we calculate k=2 on our various ensembles of lattice fields. Using the previously calculated values of f  k=1 we form the dimensionless ratio k=2/f which we then extrapolate to the continuum limit using eqn(4). We show the extrapolations

in Fig. 4. For N  6 these appear to be under good control, but for larger N that is less

clear. One would expect the slope of the extrapolation to vary smoothly with N, and that

is certainly what one sees for N = 4, 5, 6. But then there is a violent break in the behaviour

between N = 6 and N = 8 and wild oscillations when comparing the N = 8, 10, 12 slopes.

It may be that this is due to our use of smaller spatial volumes for N  8. In any case, we

calculate the continuum limits from these fits and the results for our various gauge groups

are presented in the second column of Table 15. As remarked earlier, there is good evidence

from Table 12 that for the smaller lattices that we have used for N  8 we should apply an

additional finite volume correction of  1.9(5)%. Doing this leads to the values in the third

column of Table 15, which are the values we consider to be more reliable. There is a caveat

here: at our largest values of N the values of k=2/f are quite close to the asymptotic value

of two, and so we might expect that we are in the range of N where the stronger finite volume

behaviour displayed in eqn(9) is setting in. To settle this question would require a dedicated

calculation that is beyond the scope of this paper.

12

Foe completeness we present in Table 16 our continuum extrapolations of the k = 3 and

k = 4 string tensions. These have been obtained by using eqn(8) and this undoubtedly

underestimates the finite volume corrections. Indeed as N   we expect k  kf as the k-string becomes k non-interacting fundamental strings, and then we expect a version of

eqn(9),

1

1

Ek(l) N- kf l

1

+

2 3f l2

2
= kl

1

+

2k 3k l2

2
.

(10)

Given this uncertainty and the increasing ambiguity with increasing k of extracting an effective

energy plateau, we take these values as being at best only indicative.

3.4 N   extrapolations

An interesting question about the ratio k=2/f concerns its dependence on N . On general grounds we expect the leading correction to the asymptotic value to be O(1/N2). However there are old ideas under the label of `Casimir Scaling', that the (string) tension of a flux tube should be proportional to the smallest quadratic Casimir of the representations that contribute to that flux, as though the flux tube joining two sources behaved, in this respect, just like one gluon exchange. For the k flux tube the relevant representation is the totally antisymmetric one and this predicts

k f

C=S

k(N - k) N -1

N = k -

k(k - 1) N

-

k(k - 1) N2

+O

1 N3

(11)

so that the leading correction is O(1/N) rather than O(1/N2). Previous lattice calculations
have often favoured Casimir scaling as a good approximation [38] so it is interesting to test
this idea against our k = 2 values listed in Table 15. In Fig.5 we plot our continuum values of k=2/f against 1/N 2. In addition we know that k=2/f = 2 at N =  so we impose this as a constraint in our fits. In Fig.5 we show our best fit in powers of 1/N2

k=2 f

=

2.0

-

1.28(19) N

-

4.78(90) N2

(12)

with a 2 per degree of freedom of  0.5 and an alternative best fit in powers of 1/N 2

k=2 f

=

2.0 -

14.43(60) N2

+

73.8(12.1) N4

(13)

with a 2 per degree of freedom of  2.2. The former fit is clearly better, but the latter cannot be entirely excluded. On the other hand while the fit in powers of 1/N is very good, the coefficients are very different from those obtained if we expand the Casimir scaling prediction, as in eqn(11). One may plausibly speculate that for the range of N where the k = 2 flux tube is a strongly bound state the N dependence of the string tension is best described in powers of 1/N while once N is large enough that it has become a weakly interacting pair of fundamental flux tubes, the dependance will be best described in powers of 1/N2, so that the (very) asymptotic leading correction is O(1/N2) as expected by the usual large-N counting.

13

4 Running coupling
A question of theoretical interest is whether our calculations show that we should keep the 't Hooft coupling g2N fixed as N   in order to have a smooth large-N limit. A question of phenomenological interest is whether we can estimate the scale  of our SU(N) gauge theories, from the calculated running of the gauge coupling, and in particular whether we can do so for SU(3). Finally something that is often useful in lattice calculations is to have an interpolation function for a(). These are the three issues we address in this section. A summary of the technical background to the perturbative calculations has been placed in Appendix A.

4.1 scaling with N
Since the lattice coupling gL2 defined in eqn(2) provides a definition of the running coupling on the scale a, and our above calculation of the(fundamental) string tension at various  enables us to express a in physical units, i.e. as a , we can use these calculations to address some questions about the properties of the running coupling in SU(N) gauge theories. Before doing so we recall that this lattice coupling, corresponding to the particular coupling scheme defined by the lattice and the plaquette action, is well-known to be a `poor' definition of a running coupling in the sense that higher order corrections will typically be very large. This is indicated, for example, by the relationship between the scale parameters L and MS in this scheme and the standard MS scheme [36, 37]:

M S L

=

38.853 exp

-

32 11N 2

.

(14)

This is a long-standing issue that has led to the formulation of a number of improved couplings. (For a review see [39].) Here we shall use the `mean-field' improved coupling of Parisi [40],

1 gI2

=

1 gL2

1 N

TrUp

,

(15)

which has a nice physical motivation as the effective coupling experienced by a background field (in a simple approximation). Denoting the corresponding scale by I, one finds

M S I

=

L MS I L

=

exp

-

w1 2b0

× 38.853 exp

-

32 11N 2

 2.633

(16)

using eqn(14) and eqns(58,63), with the value of L/I being obtained using eqn(53) for each , with gI2 and gL2 related by eqns(62,63), and then taking g2  0. This already suggests that gI2 has the potential to be more-or-less as good as gM2 S. One can also show [41] that this coupling tracks quite accurately the Schrodinger-functional coupling [42, 43] over a very wide
range of scales. (See [41] for a detailed discussion.) So from now on, in this section, we shall use gI2(a) as our lattice running coupling.
The main question we address concerns the N dependence of gI2(a). The usual large N counting tells us that we expect to approach constant physics as N   if we keep g2N fixed.

14

For the running coupling this means that if we plot gI2(a)N against the calculated values of a  in our SU(N) gauge theories, they should approach a common envelope as N  . The

interesting question is whether the approach is slow or fast, indicating that our values of N

are `far from' or `near to' running 't Hooft coupling

N = gI2(a)N

raegsapiencsttivaely.

In Fig. 6 we plot for all our values

our calculated values of the of N. The results are quite

remarkable: even SU(2) is very close to SU() in this respect, and it is only when the lattice

spacing show in

bFeigco. m7 etshelacrogrerethspaotnadpinpgrecpilaobtleofdgiffI2(ear)envceerssuasppaear..

To put this into perspective, we It is also interesting to see what

happens if one uses the poor gL2 (a) coupling instead of gI2(a). This is shown in Fig. 8: while

the convergence to a large N limit is still evident, the corrections at lower N are substantial

indicating that, not surprisingly, higher order non-planar contributions are important using

this coupling scheme. Finally we comment that these conclusions are not unexpected or novel:

similar analyses have appeared in for example [1, 41], albeit usually with less accuracy and over more limited ranges of N and a .

4.2 perturbative running and MS

The second question we address is whether the running coupling dependence displayed in

Fig. 6 can be described by the usual perturbative -function for at least some N once a is

small. If so we can extract a value of I for each such N and a corresponding value of MS using eqn(16). Our analysis will broadly follow that of [41] and we refer the reader to that

paper for background and context; here we merely outline the calculation, with more details

in Appendix A. To fix our notation we begin with the standard -function for the lattice bare

coupling gI2:

gI2  log a2

=

b0gI4

+ b1gI6 + bI2gI8

+ ... + O(a2),

(17)

where the scheme independent coefficients b0, b1 and the scheme dependent bI2 are given in eqn(58) and eqn(64) of Appendix A. As shown in Appendix A this motivates the following
3-loop expression for a:

 a (a)

3l=oop

(0) I

1 + ca2

b g (a) e e 2 0I

-

b1 2b20

-

2b0

1 gI2

(a)

-

1 2

gI2 0

(a)

dg2

b0bI2 -b21-b1bI2g2 b30+b20b1g2+b20bI2 g4

.

(18)

Here the first factor on the right after the coefficient is a non-perturbative tree-level lattice

aspsaacsincaglecoirnrepclaticoeno. fThe(ma)oatnivdatsiionnceisµt(haa)/twe(cao)u=ld

µju(ast=as0w)/ell u(sae

some physical mass, µ(a), = 0)(1+O(a2)) it must be

the case that we have, in general, a factor (1 + O(a2)) multiplying the perturbative expression

[41, 44]. Here we choose to use  as our scale for a2: using some other µ2 would only change

the O(a4) term and we will assume that a is small enough that we can neglect any O(a4)

terms. We evaluate numerically the integral in the exponential for any given value of gI(a): for such a smooth integrand any simple technique will be able to give accurate results. We now describe the result of fitting this function to our values of a , as listed in Tables 13,14

for SU(2) and SU(3) and in Tables 3­8 for SU(4) to SU(12). In performing these fits one can

15

either use the measured values of a2 in the (1 + ca2) lattice correction factor, or the value

cfoarlcaulate.d

from the formula itself. Not surprisingly, for the

In the latter case eqn(18) becomes a quadratic equation range of gI2(a) where eqn(18) provides a good fit to our

calculated string tensions, the difference between the two methods is insignificant, and we

choose here to use the measured value in the correction term.

ourTlahteticreesvualtluseosfoofuarfitsdiusscianrgdienqgnt(h1e8)laarrgeessthvoawluneisnuTntaibl lwee1o7b. taFionraearecahsovnaalubelyoaf cNcepwteabfilet fit. The range of lattice spacings for the fits is listed for each N, together with the 2 per degree of freedom, 2/ndf . In the few cases labelled by  in Table 17 the fits are very poor with 2/ndf  3, and so we quadruple the stated error in those cases in the hope that this
encodes the increased uncertainty. Referring to Tables 1­8 we see that the number of values

used within a given fit varies from 6 in SU(3) to 4 in SU(10) and SU(12). Since we have 2

parameters in our fit, 4 points is a very small number for a fit. Moreover, for SU(10) and

SU(12) the lattice spacings do not extend to values as small as for lower N. Hence one should

treat the resulting fits with extra caution.

In Table 17 we also list the fitted values of the perturbative scale parameter, I, in units
of the continuum string tension. We then convert this to the corresponding MS scale in the widely used MS coupling scheme, using the N -independent relation MS/I  2.633 from eqn(16) and the results are listed in the last column of Table 17, again in units of the string

tension. The quoted errors on our values of I are very small, but they are purely statistical and their smallness reflects the very small errors on the string tensions that are fitted. The

systematic errors involved in, for example, the truncation of the beta-function may be much

larger. To get some measure of this error we also perform an extra fit using the exact 2-loop

running,

 a (a)

2l=oop

cI

1 + c,I a2

e-

1 2b0 gI2

b1 b20

+

1 b0gI2

b1
. 2b20

(19)

The resulting 2-loop values about 10% smaller than the

of I are also listed in 3Iloop. We have decided

Table to use

17. We see half of this

that 2Iloop is typically difference as a measure

of the error associated with dropping 4-loop and higher coefficients from the 3-loop calculation.

This is added as a second error, within square brackets, to the resulting 3-loop values for MS that are listed in the last right-hand column of Table 17. Unlike the statistical errors, this

error will affect the results for all values of N in the same direction.



In Fig. 9 we display the values that we obtain from our 3-loop fits for MS/  as a

function of N. (We use only the statistical errors in these fits.) It is clear that the variation

with N is very weak. If we fit all our values for N  12 we find the fit,

M S 

=

0.5055(7)[250] +

0.306(12) N2

,

2/ndf = 2.70,

N  [2, 12],

(20)

which is displayed in Fig. 9. Although the 2/ndf is not good, the calculated values appear

16

to be scattered around the fit in a random pattern. Other possible fits include

M S 

=

0.5067(11)[250]

+

0.258(12) N2

,

2/ndf = 1.65,

N  [4, 12],

MS

=

0.5060(8)[250]

+

0.303(13) N2

,

2/ndf = 3.81,

N  [2, 8],

MS

=

0.5093(16)[250]

+

0.206(38) N2

,

2/ndf = 0.44,

N  [4, 8].

(21)

In all the above fits we have included within square brackets an estimate of  5% for the systematic error associated with the truncation of the perturbative expansion. We note that this systematic error is much larger than the differences between the various fits above, and is the dominant source of uncertainty.
To finish we turn briefly to the case of SU(3) where the value of MS has phenomenological interest. Here we can attempt to transform our value into MeV units as follows. We begin with its value in units of the string tension, as listed in Table 17, and we then transform this into a value in terms of the Sommer length scale r0 [45] using a recent calculation [10] that gives r0  = 1.160(6). A recent review [46] of calculations in lattice QCD with light quarks concludes that r0 = 0.472(5)fm = 1/418(5)MeV-1. The usual expectation is that the value of r0 is not very sensitive to the inclusion of light quarks, so we use this MeV value in the pure gauge theory. (This is of course the arguable step.) Doing so we arrive at

M S 

= 0.5424(13)[185] = r0MS = 0.629(4)[22] = MS S=U3 263(4)[9]MeV,
SU3

(22)

where the first error is statistical and the second is systematic. This value is consistent with the
values recently obtained in the dedicated calculations [47, 48] that use very different methods,
and our value has a similar accuracy. This adds confidence that our calculations of MS for the other SU(N) groups are also reliable.

4.3 interpolating and extrapolating functions for a()

bItecparnovoifdteend,bfeoruseexfauml tpolek,nboywththeevvaalulueeoof faa().,

Hinowphevyesriccaal lucnuiltast,ioantssoomf aevaluaereoofbt.aiTnhedis

can at a

number of discrete values of  within some finite range 0    1 and the  value of interest may lie outside this range, or may be within this range but not at one of the discrete values where a  has been calculated. In the latter case one needs to find an interpolating function that will work in the range   [0, 1] and since a  typically varies smoothly in this range (as in Fig.7) this is easy to do: a few sensibly chosen terms from almost any complete set

of functions will work adequately. However if the  value of interest lies outside the range

[0, 1] and, in particular, if it is at some weaker coupling, then extrapolating such a `random' interpolating fit will invariably work badly unless the original interpolating function has a

form motivated by weak coupling perturbation theory, in which case it should (in principle)

17

be reasonably accurate. In the section above we have used precisely such functions. We will
here present a fit in an explicit form so that the reader can readily employ it. Our fit will be in terms of the mean-field improved coupling gI2 defined in eqn(15). This
requires that one know the value of the average plaquette; this is always calculated in a Monte

Carlo but one needs to record the average, which is normally done so as to provide a first

check on the calculation. (And if not, one can obtain a value with adequate accuracy very quickly using small lattices and modest statistics.) The interpolating function we will use is

a variation on the ones used above and is as follows:

 a (a) = c0

1 + ca2(a)

F2l+(gI ),

(23)

where

F2l+(gI )

=

e-

1 2b0 gI2

b1 b20

+

1 b0gI2

e . b1
2b20

-

bI2 2b20

gI2

(24)

The first two factors of F2l+(gI) constitute the exact dependence when (g) is truncated to
the first two terms. The last factor on the right is the extra dependence if one keeps in the exponent the leading O(bI2) term to O(gI2). That is to say, it is `more' than 2 loops, but `less' than 3 loops. Hence the subscript 2l+ on F (g). This is of course an arbitrary truncation with

no guarantee that it does indeed do better than the 2-loop one; however we use it because, as

we shall see below, it turns out to be very close to the 3-loop result, but without the need to perform any numerical integrations. Note that here we choose to use in the  a2 correction

term the value given by fitting the formula to our data since this is the mode in which it needs

to be used in an extrapolation.

 To make use of eqn(24) we need to fit the constants c0 and c to our calculated values of a , at each N .Once the constants c0 and c have been fitted we can solve eqn(23), which is quadratic in a , at any value of I:

 a (a)

=

1 2c0cF2l+(I )

1-

1 - 4c20cF2l+(I )2

.

(25)

In eqn(24) the values of b0, b1, bI2 need to be specified. The values of b0 and b1 are universal and are given in eqn(58). The value of bI2 is as given in eqn(64)

bI2 = bL2 + w2b0 - w1b1,

(26)

where we use eqns(59,61) in eqn(60) to obtain the explicit expression for bL2 and then inserting that together with the functions in eqn(63) and eqn(58) into eqn(26) we obtain the explicit

expression for bI2 for any N . It only remains now to give our fitted values of c0 and c for each of the SU(N ) groups
for which we have calculated the string tension. This we do in Table 18. There we show for

each N our best fits to these two parameters as well as the fitted range and the 2 per degree

oaffreferdoommthoef

the fit. fit until

In we

performing these fits we obtain an acceptable 2.

systematically drop the This is appropriate since

largest values of our interpolating

function is based on weak-coupling perturbation theory. Note that being based on weak

18

coupling the resulting function is not designed to work for values of a or g2 greater than the

range within which it provides a good fit.

As an aside it needs to be emphasised that all the above fits are only relevant if one uses

the Wilson plaquette action. Asa second aside, we note that if one wants a() in terms of

fsoormaephytsoicoanl escfaolre

µ instead of aµ by using

 the

rtehleantioonneµc/anst=radig0h+fordw1aa2rdlyif

modify the above formula it accurately holds in the

range of couplings of interest.

5 Glueball masses
5.1 quantum numbers
The glueballs are colour singlets and so our glueball operator is obtained by taking the ordered product of SU(N) link matrices around a contractible loop and then taking the trace. To retain the exact positivity of the correlators we use loops that contain only spatial links. The real part of the trace projects on C = + and the imaginary part on C = -. We sum all spatial translations of the loop so as to obtain an operator with momentum p = 0. We take all rotations of the loop and and construct the linear combinations that transform according to the irreducible representations, R, of the rotational symmetry group of our cubic spatial lattice. We always choose to use a cubic lattice volume that respects these symmetries. For each loop we also construct its parity inverse so that taking linear combinations we can construct operators of both parities, P = ±. The correlators of such operators will project onto glueballs with p = 0 and the RP C quantum numbers of the operators concerned.
The irreducible representations R of our subgroup of the full rotation group are usually labelled as A1, A2, E, T1, T2. The A1 is a singlet and rotationally symmetric, so it will contain the J = 0 state in the continuum limit. The A2 is also a singlet, while the E is a doublet and T1 and T2 are both triplets. In Section 5.6 we will outline the detailed relationship between these representations and the continuum spin J. Since, for example, the three states transforming as the triplet of T2 are degenerate on the lattice, we average their values and treat them as one state in our tables of glueball masses and we do the same with the T1 triplets and the E doublets. (Just as we would treat the 5 states of a continuum J = 2 glueball as one entry.)
5.2 finite volume effects
For reasons of computational economy we wish to calculate on lattice sizes that are small but, at the same time, large enough that any finite volume corrections remain smaller than our typical statistical errors. Since the computional cost of calculating in SU(N) gauge theories grows roughly  N3 (the multiplication of two N × N matrices) and since finite volume corrections are expected to decrease as powers of 1/N, we reduce the size in physical units of our lattices as we increase N, as shown in Tables 1-8.
There are two important types of finite volume corrections. The first can be thought of as arising when the propagating glueball emits a virtual glueball which propagates around the

19

spatial torus. The resulting shift in the mass of the propagating glueball decreases exponen-

tially in mGl where mG is the mass gap and l is the length of the spatial torus [18]. As we

see from Tables 1-8 the value of amG × l/a is quite large in all of our calculations, so we can expect this correction to be small.

The second type of finite volume correction consists of states composed of multiple flux

tubes winding around a spatial torus in a (centre) singlet state. The lightest of these will be a

state composed of one winding flux tube together with a conjugate winding flux tube, which

we refer to as a `ditorelon'. (A single winding flux tube is usually referred to as a `torelon'.)

Since it can have a non-zero overlap onto the contractible loops that we use as our glueball

operators, it can appear as a state in our calculated glueball spectrum. Neglecting interactions,

the lightest ditorelon will consist of each flux tube in its ground state with zero momentum

and will have an energy, Ed, that is twice that of the flux tube ground state, Ed = 2Ef . Interactions will shift the energy but this shift should be small on our volumes so we shall

use Ed  2Ef as a rough guide in searching for these states. This ground state ditorelon has simple rotational properties and only contribute to the A+1 + and E++ representations. If we
allow one or both of the component flux tubes to be excited and/or to have non-zero equal

and opposite transverse momenta we can populate other representations and produce towers

of states. However these excited ditorelon states will be considerably heavier on the lattice

volumes we employ and so we will not consider them any further in this paper, although they

certainly warrant further study.

The first of the above corrections leads to small shifts in the masses of the glueballs. The

second leads to extra states in the glueball spectrum. The signature of such an extra ditorelon

state is that its mass grows roughly linearly with the lattice size: aED  2aEf  2a2f L where

L is the relevant spatial size in lattice units and f is the (fundamental) string tension. So to test for finite volume effects we perform calculations at the same value of  on different lattice

sizes and compare the glueball spectra. To identify any ditorelon states we look for extra states

in the A+1 + and E++ spectra whose masses increase roughly linearly with the volume. Since the mass shift associated with the first kind of correction decreases exponentially with the lattice

size any shift on a significantly larger volume should be much smaller than on the smaller

volume; so to check that it is negligible compared to our statistical errors we simply compare

the masses of the states that are not ditorelons on the different volumes. As we see from

Tlables

1-8 3.1

the for

lattice S U (5),

sSizUe(s6w);eluse

fall into three groups: l   4.0 for SU(2), SU(3),  2.6 for SU(8), SU(10), SU(12). We will exhibit

S U (4); a finite

volume analysis for a representative of each of these three groups.

We begin with SU(2). In Table 19 we list the low-lying glueball spectra that we obtain

on 3 lattice sizes, together with the energies of the ground and first excited states of the

winding flux tubes. In physical units the L = 12, 14, 20 spatial lattice sizes correspond to

ll

 

2.9, 3.4, 4.8 4. For the

respectively and we recall that the typical lattice size we use in SU(2) is glueball states we list the effective energy at t = 2a or, where applicable,

the energy of the fit to the effective energy plateau when that begins at t = 2a. (These

two measures differ very little in practice.) These are obtained from the correlators of our

variationally selected best operators. For most of our lighter states the value of aEeff (t = 2a) is very close to our best estimate of the mass. For these finite volume comparisons we prefer

20

this measure to the mass itself because it serves to minimise the statistical errors and makes

any finite volume corrections more visible. Putting aside the RP = A+1 and the E+ spectra for the moment, we see that most of the glueball energies on the L = 14 and L = 20 lattices are

consistent within one standard deviation and all within two standard deviations. The energies

from the L = 12 lattice are broadly consistent but there are now some examples, such as the

A+2 and E- ground states, where there appear to be significant differences. We now return to the A+1 and the E+ spectra listed in Table 19 to see if there is any evidence of the extra ditorelon states. We do indeed see these on the L = 12 and L = 14 lattices in both the A+1 and the E+ spectra: these states are displayed in the Table with no corresponding entries

at other lattice sizes. Their effective energies increase with L and are just a little heavier

than twice the flux tube energy. For the L = 20 lattice any ditorelon state would be much

heavier than any of the states shown: at such energies the spectrum is denser, the errors are

larger, and so identifying an `extra' state becomes ambiguous. The remaining states in the

A+1 and the E+ spectra are broadly consistent across the lattice sizes, except for the lightest E+ on L = 12 and the first excited A+1 on L = 14, both of which are quite close to their respective ditorelons and possibly mixing with them. Also the 4th state inthe L = 12 A+1 spectrum shows a shift. Since the typical lattice size we use in SU(2) is l   4 (except

for the relatively unimportant calculations at thelargest values of a()) we can estimate the

ditorelon states to perform continuum

have energies ED extrapolations of

 2l  2(l ) A+1 and E+ states

 that

8 are

 and we shall lighter than 

therefore only 8 , although

it is still the case contributions. As

ftohratthtehoethheeravciheasnt nsetlast,essinincetthheesesiczhealnnelsm4afyallbsebpetewrteuernbeodurbLy

ditorelon = 14 and

L = 20 lattices at  = 2.427, we can conclude from the above that there should be no finite

volume corrections that would be visible outside our statistical errors. We have performed

similar finite volume checks in SU(3) in our earlier paper [10] and we refer the reader to that

paper for details, in particular for a check of the C = - states. In the case of SU(4) we

have performed a finite volume analysis comparing the spectra on 18320 and 224 lattices at

 = 11.02, which has helped us identify the positions of the ditorelon states in the spectra at

other values of , and to remove these states from our spectra. With all these checks we have

some confidence that our SU(2), SU(3) and SU(4) continuum spectra will not be afflicted by

significant finite volume corrections.

lOur3.S1U, a(n5)d

and SU(6) calculations are therefore deserve a separate

on significantly smaller volumes, typically with finite volume study to the one above. In Table 20

we list the low-lying glueball spectra that we obtain in SU(5) on two lattice sizes at  = 17.46,

together with the energies of the ground and first excited states of the fundamental and k = 2

winding flux tubes. In physical units these L = 14 and L = 18 spatial lattice sizes correspond to l   3.06 and 3.93 respectively and we recall that the typical lattice size we use in SU(5) and SU(6) is l   3.1 i.e. close to that of the smaller of our two lattices. The energies

listed are as in the SU(2) case above. As in SU(2) we readily identify the extra ditorelon

states in the A+1 + and E++ representations, which have energies very close to twice that of the winding fundamental flux tube. (The ditorelon on the L = 18 lattice will lie outside our

energy range.) They appear to be well separated from neighbouring glueball states and so we

can readily identify and exclude them from our SU(5) and SU(6) glueball spectra and exclude

21

them from our continuum limits. The other energies on our two lattice sizes are mostly within

errors of each other, with a few out by up to two standard deviations, and two states a little

more than that. Given the large number of states being compared, such rare discrepancies

are inevitable and we can claim that we see no significant finite volume corrections to any of

our listed states.

lWe

now 2.6.

turn Our

to our largest finite volume

N calculations study is in SU

where we use the even smaller spatial lattice size (12) on 12320 and 14320 lattices at  = 103.03,

where the 12320 lattice represents our typical physical size, and the energies are listed in

Table 21. In contrast to the previous tables, we list under the A+1 + and E++ representations our best estimate of the true glueball spectrum with the ditorelons removed. We will return

to the identification of the latter shortly. We observe that most of the energies are the same

within errors and all are within two standard deviations. That is to say, any finite volume

shifts in the energies are within our statistical errors at these values of N, despite the fact

that the L = 12 lattice volume is quite small.

The situation with respect to the ditorelons is more complex. The first complication is

that on the 12320 lattice the A+1 + ditorelon is nearly degenerate with the first excited A+1 + glueball, so that these states may well mix even if the overlaps are small due to the large-N

suppression. Moreover the same occurs in the E++ representation where the ditorelon is nearly

degenerate with the ground state E++ glueball. The second complication arises from the fact

that the overlap of the ditorelon double trace operators onto the single trace operators that

we used to calculate the glueball spectrum is suppressed since N is large. This should be an

advantage and indeed if the overlap is small enough then the ditorelon will not appear in the

spectrum obtained from the single trace operators so that there is no issue. However it may

well appear as a minor component of a state that at first sight is quite massive but then its

aEeff (t) drops towards the ditorelon energy as t increases and the more massive components die away. This can lead to ambiguities and indeed does on both our lattice sizes.

Since all our SU(12) glueball calculations, and also those in SU(10) and SU(8), are on

lattices of roughly the same physical size as our 12320 one at  = 103.03, we need to address

these problems with the ditorelons. We do so as follows. First we find that if in constructing

our glueball operators we use blocked links whose extent is smaller than the lattice size then

the overlap of ditorelons onto these operators is small enough that we do not see any ditorelon

state in the A+1 + spectrum but we do see it embedded as a small component in more massive states in the E++ spectrum. Since a link at blocking level bl joins sites that are 2bl-1a apart,

this means keeping to blocking levels bl = 1 - 4 on our l = 12a and l = 14a lattices. If we now

do something that may appear less reasonable and include bl = 5 blocked links, which join

lattice sites 16a apart, so that the operators formed out of these links wrap multiply around the

spatial torus in all spatial directions, we find that the ditorelon overlaps are much larger and

the ditorelon states now appear quite clearly in the resulting spectrum. The results of these

various calculations are shown in Table 22. As usual the energies shown are aEeff (t = 2a)

and so are often slightly higher than the value of the effective energy plateau. Consider first

the A+1 + spectra on the 12320 lattice. We see that the second and third states in the bl = 1 - 5 spectrum are nearly degenerate, with masses close to what one might expect for the ditorelon,

i.e. 2aEf  0.96, but only one of them appears in the bl = 1 - 4 spectrum. Thus we infer that

22

one of those two (or a mixture of the two) is a ditorelon. On the 14320 lattice we also see an extra state in the bl = 1 - 5 spectrum, as compared to the bl = 1 - 4 spectrum, but now the state is heavier, as we would expect for a ditorelon since 2aEf  1.2 on this lattice. Turning to the E++ representation on the 14320 lattice we find an extra state using the bl = 1-5 basis, as compared to using the bl = 1 - 4 basis, with roughly the expected mass of a ditorelon. On the 12320 lattice things are a bit different: the second state in the bl = 1 - 5 spectrum has no obvious partner in the bl = 1 - 4 spectrum, but there is a state in the latter spectrum where aEff (t) decreases rapidly with increasing t to a comparable value. This is the second entry in the table and the mass from the `plateau', indicated in square brackets, is similar to the energy of the second state in the bl = 1 - 5 spectrum. We interpret this as follows: the E++ ditorelon has a substantial overlap onto the bl = 1 - 5 basis and only a small overlap onto the bl = 1 - 4 basis, but large enough to appear within what appears to be a higher excited state. This mass is somewhat smaller than that of the state we identified as a ditorelon on the 14320 lattice which is what one expects. We note that unlike the states we identify as ditorelons, most of the other states have nearly the same energies on the two lattice sizes, as one expects for states that are not ditorelons. Recalling that the lattice sizes we use in our N  8 calculations are of the same physical size as our 12320 lattice at  = 103.03, we can use the above results in all those cases to identify ditorelon states and remove them from our glueball spectra. The same type of technique is useful for N = 5, 6.
A final comment is that the rotational symmetries of the ditorelon states ­ and indeed multitorelon states ­ remain those of our finite volume, i.e. /2 rotations, even in the continuum limit. That is to say, even in that limit they will fall into the representations of the cubic subgroup of the continuum rotation group. The genuine glueballs, on the other hand, will fall into representations of the full continuum rotation group in the continuum limit once the volume is large enough, up to corrections that are exponentially small in the spatial size, and this difference can also be useful in distinguishing ditorelons from genuine glueballs.
5.3 lattice masses
As described earlier, we calculate glueball masses from the correlators of suitable p = 0 operators. These operators are chosen to have the desired RP C quantum numbers, where R  {A1, A2, E, T1, T2} labels the irreducible representation of the cubic subgroup of the rotation group and P = ± and C = ± label parity and charge conjugation. We typically start with a set of 12 different closed loops on the lattice. (For N = 2, 3 we used 27, but we then observed that we can get almost equally good spectra by using a suitable subset of 12 loops.) We calculate all 24 rotations of the loop and construct linear combinations of the traces that tranform as R. We do so separately using the real and imaginary parts of the traces, which gives us operators with C = ± respectively. We also calculate the parity inverses of each of these twelve loops, and of their rotations, and by adding and subtracting appropriate operators from these two sets we form operators for each R with P = ±. To ensure that we have non-trivial operators for each set of quantum numbers it is useful to include some loops that have no symmetry under rotations and parity inversion. With our particular choice of 12 (or 27) closed loops we are able to construct the number of independent operators shown
23

in Table 23. This is the number of operators at each blocking level and we typically use 4 or 5 blocking levels in our calculations. This makes for quite a large basis of operators for all RP C quantum numbers, and indeed a very large number for most of them. However this large number is slightly deceptive as at any given  only two or perhaps three blocking levels make an important contribution to the low-lying spectrum. In addition the states in the E representation are doubly degenerate and in the T1 and T2 are triply degenerate, so one should divide the corresponding numbers in Table 23 by 2 or 3 in order to estimate the number of different energy levels accessible to the basis.
For completeness we list our 12 basic loops in Table 24. The links are labelled by 1, 2, 3 to indicate their spatial directions, with negative signs for backward going links, and the path ordering is from left to right. So, for example, the plaquette in the 2 - 3 plane would appear as {2, 3, -2, -3}. Our list includes the plaquette, three 6 link loops, four 8 link loops and four 10 link loops. We also show for each loop which representations it contributes to once we include all the rotations and the inverses, doing so for the real (C = +) and imaginary (C = -) parts of the traces separately. This basis is used for N  4. For SU(2) and SU(3) we use a larger basis of 27 loops that includes the 12 listed here. For some finite size studies we have used a reduced set of 8 loops.
We use these bases of operators in our variational calculations of the glueball spectra. In each RP C sector we calculate a number of the lowest masses from the correlation functions of the operators that our variational procedure selects as being the best operators for those states within our basis. This relies on identifying an effective mass plateau in the correlator, as described in Section 2.2, and performing an exponential fit to the data points on that plateau. So an important question is: how reliably can we identify such a plateau? We will illustrate this with our calculations in SU(8) on the 20330 lattice at  = 47.75. This is at our smallest value of a() which, being the closest to the continuum limit, is one of the most important values in our subsequent extrapolations to the continuum theory. Also it provides the best resolution in t of our correlation functions. We begin with the effective masses, aEeff (t = ant), of the three lightest A+1 + states and of the two lightest A-1 + states, as shown in Fig.10. As we will see below, the lightest two A+1 + and A-1 + states become the lightest two JP C = 0++ and 0-+ glueballs in the continuum limit. The third A+1 + state is most likely part of the nonet of spin states making up the 4++ glueball ground state (see below), although if not then it would probably be the third scalar glueball. It is clear from Fig.10 that we have plausible effective mass plateaux for all the states, with the weakest case being the excited A-1 + state. Essentially, this illustrates the obvious fact that as the masses get larger, the error to signal ratio grows at any fixed value of nt, so that at large enough masses the effective energies becomes too imprecise to unambiguously indicate the values of nt where the effective mass plateau begins. In this case we can turn to our calculations of the excited A-1 + state at the smallest lattice spacings in SU(2) and SU(3), where there is much better evidence for the effective mass plateau beginning at aMeff (nt = 3a), and use that in estimating that the effective mass plateau in this SU(8) calculations begins at nt = 3a. This is the type of argument we use for a number of the heavier states at larger values of N where our calculations do not extend to very small values of a().
As an aside, we also show in this plot the effective mass plot for the ditorelon. It shows
24

every sign of plateauing to a value not far from  2aEf  0.59 as one would expect. It is clearly important to make sure that one excludes such a state from the scalar glueball spectrum, as we have done here, since it is located near the first excited glueball state and would create a false level ordering if included.
We turn next to states which become J = 2 glueballs in the continuum limit. As we shall see below, the five components of a J = 2 state are spread over the two components of an E energy level and the three of a T2. As always we average the masses of the `degenerate' doublets of R = E and the triplets of R = T1 and T2 to provide single effective masses in each case. What we show in Fig.11 are the resulting effective mass plots for a number of such pairs of E and T2 states. The equality of the E++ and T2++ masses for the lightest two pairs is convincing, as it is for the lightest E-+ and T2-+. It is also plausible for the lightest E--, T2-- pair, and the lightest E+-, T2+- pair, and there is some convergence for the second E-+, T2-+ pair, even if these more massive states do not show unambiguous plateaux. Again we show the ditorelon, this time in the E++ representation. In this spectrum it is nearly degenerate with the E++ ground state. The fact that it does not appear in a nearly degenerate T2++ state confirms that it is a finite volume state, reflecting the limited rotational symmetries of the spatial volume.
In Fig.12 we show the effective mass plots for a number of T1P C states that we shall later argue approach J = 1 in the continuum limit. While the lightest T1+- glueball has a welldefined effective mass plateau, this is less evident for the more massive states. Finally, in Fig.13 we display the effective masses of the lightest five A-1 - states, as an example of the very heaviest states that we attempt to calculate. While one can speculate on the presence of some plateaux, the evidence is clearly not strong. This will clearly result in substantial systematic errors on the indicated mass estimates, which we cannot readily quantify.
One lesson of these effective mass plots is that the heavier the state the less reliable will be our error estimate. However these plots also tell us at what t = ant the effective mass plateau begins for those states where this can be identified. Since the iterative blocking means that when we vary  our variationally selected operators are of roughly constant physical size and shape, we can assume that the overlap of a given state onto our basis will be roughly independent of  and hence that the effective mass plateau will begin at a value of t = a()nt that is roughly constant in physical units, i.e. at smaller nt as a() grows. So at larger values of a() where aEeff (t) may be too large for us to identify a plateau, we can nonetheless use the value of aEeff (t0), where t0 is the value where our above calculations tell us that a plateau begins, as an estimate of the mass. This is something we do in our calculations, where appropriate.
We turn now to the glueball spectra that we obtain by the methods described above. The spectra we obtain for the lightest glueballs in each RP C sector are displayed in Tables 25-32. We have removed the finite volume ditorelon states in the A+1 + and E++ sectors whenever they were present, as discussed in Section 5.2, so that what we present in each Table is our best estimate of the infinite volume glueball spectrum. We do not present the spectra for SU(3) since these have been published separately in [10]. (We have in fact calculated a more extensive spectrum than that shown, at the smaller values of a() where that becomes possible.) This assumes of course that none of these states is a multiglueball state. Since we use single trace
25

operators, their overlap onto multiglueball states should decrease with increasing N and in any case they would be quite heavy. Some explicit calculations that provide evidence that such mutliglueball states do not appear in our spectra are described in Section 5.7.
The reader will note that in some cases what we list as a higher excited state has a lower mass than what is listed as a lower excited state. This typically involves states that are nearly degenerate. Our procedure is to order the states according to the values of their effective masses at t = a which is the value of t at which our variational calculation typically operates. This nearly always corresponds to final mass estimates (from the plateaux) that are in the same order, but very occasionally this not the case. In the very few cases where the difference is well outside the statistical errors we invert the ordering, but otherwise we do not. In addition it may be that the continuum extrapolation leads to a level inversion; again we only take that on board if the difference is well outside the errors. We have a good number of states that are nearly degenerate with a neighbouring state and in these cases the variational procedure itself is likely to mix them, and if that is done differently at different values of  it can lead to poor extrapolations to the continuum limit.
Finally we remark that the ensembles of lattice fields used at each N and  have a reasonable distribution of topological charge, either because the tunnelling between topological charge sectors is sufficiently frequent, or because we have imposed such a distribution on the initial lattice fields of the collection of sequences that make up the total ensemble, as discussed in Section 2.4.

5.4 continuum masses

For each of our SU(N) lattice gauge theories we now have the low-lying glueball spectra for

a range of values of a(). These are physical units we can take the ratio

all to

gthiveenstrininlgattteincseiounn,itasas ,atMha,tawnde

to transform that to have simultaneously

calculated. We can then extrapolate this ratio to the continuum limit using the standard

Symanzik effective action analysis [49] that tells us that for our lattice action the leading

correction at tree-level is O(a2):

aaM((aa)) = M((aa)) = M((00)) + a2(a) + O(a4).

(27)

Here we have used the calculated string tension, a2(a), as the O(a2) correction. Clearly we could use any other calculated energy, and this would differ at O(a4) in eqn(27). It is convenient to use a2(a) since its calculated value has very small errors.
The results of these continuum extrapolations are listed in Tables 33-40 for the gauge
groups ranging from SU2) to SU(12). (As always, each E doublet, and each T2 or T1 triplet appears as a single state in our tables and discussions.) A few entries are accompanied by a star denoting a poor fit, 2.5 < 2/ndf < 3.5, or a double star denoting a very poor fit, 2/ndf  3.5. For SU(10) and SU(12) we have only 5 values of  and since the masses at the coarsest value of  often have to be discarded from the fit (not surprisingly) and since we are
fitting 2 parameters, we often have only 2 degrees of freedom. For lower N we usually have 3

26

and sometimes 4 degrees of freedom, which gives much more confidence in the extrapolations. All of which is to say that while the fits for larger N are certainly not trivial, it would be good
to be able to do better in future calculations. We now illustrate the quality of these linear continuum extrapolations for our most in-
teresting glueball states. We do so for SU(4). In Fig.14 we show our extrapolations of the lightest two A+1 +, E++ and T2++ states. These states are of particular importance because, as we shall see latter on, they correspond to the lightest two JP C = 0++ and 2++ states. We see that all the linear fits are convincing, even if in some cases we have to exclude from the fit
the value at the largest a(). In Fig.15 we show the corresponding plot for P = - which, as we shall see latter on, correspond to the lightest two JP C = 0-+ and 2-+ states. The lightest
states have very plausible continuum extrapolations, although the excited states, which are heavier than those for P = +, begin to show a large scatter indicating a poor fit. In Fig.16 we show the extrapolations of various T1P C states that we shall later argue correspond to J = 1, and again we see fits that appear convincing for the lighter states and quite plausible for the heavier states. Finally, we show in Fig.17 the continuum extrapolations of some of the
heaviest states to which we can plausibly assign a continuum spin. Here the errors are larger, the scatter of points is greater but the fits linear in a2 are still plausible.

5.5 N   extrapolation

Amongst the various SU(N) calculations, the one that is most interesting from a phenomenological point of view is the SU(3) one, and that is why we devoted a separate paper to that case [10]. From a theoretical point of view however the most interesting glueball spectra are those of the SU(N  ) theory since the theoretical simplifications in that limit make it the most likely case to be accessible to analytic solution, whether complete or partial.
To obtain the N =  spectrum from our results so far, we use the fact that in the pure gauge theory the leading correction is O(1/N2). So we can extrapolate the continuum mass ratios in Tables 33-40 using

Mi 

N

=

Mi 

+


ci N2

+O

1 N4

.

(28)

The results of these extrapolations are presented in Table 41. In this table the stars point
to poor fits exactly as described earlier for the continuum fits. The very poor fit for the first excited A+1 + is due to a large mismatch between the SU(5) and SU(6) mass estimates which may well be due to an inadequate treatment of the ditorelon influence. (We can obtain a
good fit to N  6 and this gives a mass  5.85(9) which is the same within errors.) Most
of the fits are to N  2 or N  3 but some are over a more restricted range of N and this is indicated by a dagger.These states are the A+2 + ground state, fitted to N  4, the T2-+ second excited state, also fitted to N  4, the T2-- ground state, again fitted to N  4, and finally the A+2 - ground state which is more arguable since it was fitted to N  8. From the practical point of view the most important extrapolations are for those states to which we are
able to assign a continuum spin (in the next section). We therefore show these extrapolations
in Figs.18,19,20,21 for states with J = 0, 2, 1, 3 respectively.

27

5.6 continuum spins
So far we have used the representations of the rotational symmetry of our cubic spatial lattice to label our glueball states. However as we approach the continuum limit these states will approach the continuum glueball states and these belong to representations of the continuum rotational symmetry, i.e. they fall into degenerate multiplets of 2J + 1 states where J is the spin. In determining the continuum limit of the low-lying glueball spectrum, it is clearly more useful to be able to assign the states to a given spin J, rather than to the representations of the cubic subgroup which have a much less fine `resolution' since all of J = 0, 1, 2, ...,  are mapped to just 5 cubic representations. How the 2J + 1 states for a given J are distributed amongst the representations of the cubic symmetry subgroup is given, for the relevant low values of J, in Table 42. So, for example, we see that the seven states corresponding to a J = 3 glueball will be distributed over a singlet A2, a degenerate triplet T1 and a degenerate triplet T2, so seven states in total. These A2, T1 and T2 states will be split by O(a2) lattice spacing corrections, generated by irrelevant operators. So once a is small enough these states will be nearly degenerate and one can use this near-degeneracy to identify the continuum spin.
This strategy works for the lightest states but becomes rapidly unrealistic for heavier states. The latter will have larger statistical errors and will fall amongst other states that become more densely packed as the energy increases, so that identifying apparent near-degeneracies between states in different representations becomes highly ambiguous. There exist more sytematic ways of assigning continuum spin to lattice states, such as [7, 8, 50], but these are beyond the scope of this work. Accordingly we shall limit ourselves to the lightest states where any ambiguity in identifying near-degeneracies is either small or non-existent.
The states whose spin J we feel confident in identifying are listed in Table 43 and the resulting continuum masses are listed in Table 44 and Table 45. We will now briefly illustrate the argument for the assignments, taking SU(8) as a typical example. Consider the masses in the SU(8) column of Table 45. We have obtained these by interpreting the masses listed in Table 38 as follows. The ground state of RP C = A+1 + is much lighter than any other mass and so must be the singlet JP C = 0++ ground state. The first excited A+1 + state certainly has no `nearly-degenerate' partners amongst all the other P, C = +, + states and so it must be the first excited 0++ glueball. The ground states of the doubly degenerate E++ and the triply degenerate T2++ states are nearly degenerate and there are no other states with similar masses, so together they must provide the five components of the JP C = 2++ ground state. Similarly the first excited E++ doublet and T2++ triplet have no nearly degenerate companion states elsewhere, and so they provide the first excited JP C = 2++ state. The argument for the ground and first excited 0-+ states is equally straightforward, as it is for the E-+ and the T2-+ ground states forming the 2-+ ground state. The first excited E-+ and the T2-+ states are consistent with forming the first excited 2-+ state, but here there is some ambiguity: it is also possible that these states pair with the second excited A-1 + state and the T1-+ ground state to make up the 4-+ ground state. This ambiguity arises because the errors are sufficiently large that both possibilities can be entertained. Here we can resolve the ambiguity by observing that for neighbouring values of N, SU(6) and SU(10), the ambiguity is not present and the first excited E-+ and the T2-+ states form the first excited 2-+ state, strongly suggesting that
28

this is also the case for SU(8). This choice is not as solid as the earlier choices and fortunately it is not an argument we need to make very often in coming to our choices of J. With this choice we can plausibly assign the lightest T1-+ state to the 1-+ ground state. (The second excited A-1 + state has a similar mass but there are no further partners allowing us to assign it elsewhere according to Table 42.) Similar arguments to the above lead to the J+- and J-- choices in Table 43 and the corresponding masses in Table 45. Determining the spin J in the above way, clearly requires us not to miss any intermediate states in the mass range of interest. For this one needs a good enough overlap onto all the low-lying states and for that one needs a large basis of operators, which has been our goal in these calculations.
Using the arguments sketched above we infer the JP C glueball masses listed in Tables 44,45, from the various masses listed in Tables 33-40. In addition by inspecting the remaining states in Tables 33-40 we can infer some lower bounds on the ground states in some other channels, and these are listed in Table 46. These estimates are fairly rough and at that level apply to all our SU(N) theories.
The most interesting glueball spectra are those for SU(3) and for SU(): the former for its potential phenomenological relevance and the latter for its potential theoretical accessibility. The SU(3) theory is sufficiently close to the real world of QCD that it makes sense to attempt to present the masses in physical units, using scales that one believes to be relatively insensitive to the presence of quarks. We refer the reader to [10] for the results of this exercise. Here we focus on the N   limit. We extrapolate the masses in Tables 44,45 with O(1/N2) corrections, as in eqn(28). The extrapolations for most of these states are displayed in Figs.18,19,20,21. This leads to the masses (in units of the string tension) listed in Table 47. In making these extrapolations we have sometimes excluded the mass for the smallest value of N (N = 2 for C = + and N = 3 for C = -), in order to achieve a significantly better fit. This we have done for the 2++, 1-+ and 1-- ground states. This presumably reflects the need for at least a further 1/N4 correction, but our number of data points is too small for this. In some cases we obtain better fits by excluding the N = 12 values, and although this could be argued for on the basis that our range of a for the continuum extrapolation is relatively limited in that case, the danger of `cherry-picking' has led us to avoid doing so.
The main features of these continuum spectra are that the lightest glueball is the JP C = 0++ scalar, with the JP C = 2++ tensor about 50% heavier, and with the JP C = 0-+ pseudoscalar just slightly above that. The next state is the JP C = 1+- vector, which is special in that it is the only relatively light C = - glueball, with most C = - states being very heavy. Just a little heavier than this vector is the first excited 0++ and then the 2-+ ground state. The N dependence of nearly all these states is weak and readily absorbed into a O(1/N2) correction down to at least SU(3); all this confirming that the SU(3) gauge theory is indeed `close to' SU().
5.7 scattering states
A given operator will project onto all states with the quantum numbers of that operator. In particular our single trace glueball operators will project onto multi-glueball states in addition to the glueballs that we are interested in. This means that some of the states in the `glueball'
29

spectra that we have calculated may in fact be multi-glueball states. In the ideal case of a very large spatial volume these will be scattering states where at sufficiently large times the states are far apart
There is some ambiguity here of course. Sufficiently heavy glueballs will be unstable, and will decay into multiglueball states but to the extent that their decay width is not too large, we still regard them as glueball states. Indeed as N increases the decay widths and the overlap of multiglueball states onto our single trace basis of glueball operators should decrease. So although we expect this to be an issue primarily at smaller N, it is clearly important to address. We do so here in some detail because it has been addressed only briefly and occasionally in past glueball calculations.
A full analysis of scattering states and glueball decays would involve different techniques to those used in this paper and so are outside the scope of this work. Here we will, instead, perform some exploratory calculations to obtain an indication of the impact of multiglueball states on our calculated glueball spectra. We limit ourselves to considering states consisting of two glueballs since these are the lightest ones and our calculated glueball spectra do not extend to masses that are much higher. If there is weak mixing between double trace and single trace operators then we can introduce two glueball scattering states by using double trace operators, such as

ab(t) = (a(t) - a )(b(t) - b ) - (a - a )(b - b ) .

(29)

Here a and b are single trace operators. The vacuum subtractions ensure that ab does not have a projection onto the vacuum or a `trivial' projection onto single glueball states through terms such as a b(t). One can calculate the mass spectrum obtained when one adds such double trace operators to the basis of single trace operators and compare it to that obtained using just the single trace operators. If the resulting spectra are the same then this strongly suggests that the spectrum obtained using single trace operators already includes two glueball states. If, on the other hand, the spectrum obtained using the expanded basis produces extra states that can be plausibly interpreted as two glueball scattering states, then this suggests that the states obtained with our original basis of single trace operators does not contain such states and that categorising them as single glueball states is probably correct.
The potential number of operators ab is clearly too huge to be practical here and so we severely limit the number for our study as follows. Firstly, we take both a and b to have zero momentum, so both the total and relative momenta are zero. Of course this does not mean that the relative momentum of the two glueballs has to be zero, since the relative momentum is not a conserved quantum number in an interacting system, but one naively expects that the main overlap will be onto zero relative momentum. Secondly we only keep the 2 or 3 blocking levels that are most important at the  we calculate. (We systematically avoid using the largest blocking levels so as to exclude unwanted ditorelon states.) Thirdly, we take the same blocking levels for a and b. For a we use only the rotationally invariant sum of (blocked) plaquettes. That is to say it is in the A+1 + representation. So ab will be in the same representation as b. For b we take 3 different loops chosen so that we can have projections onto all representations including P = ± and C = ±. The lightest energy of the

30

corresponding asymptotic two glueball state would be the sum of the lightest A+1 + mass plus the lightest mass in the representation of b if we were in an infinite spatial volume. Since our spatial volume is finite the glueballs are interacting at all times and there will be a shift in the total energy. However, to the extent that our spatial volume is not very small, this shift should be small and we will use the naive sum as the quantity against which to compare our supposed scattering states.
We perform calculations in SU(3), which is the most physically interesting case amongst our lower N calculations, and in SU(8) which is representative of our large N calculations. In SU(3) we work at  = 6.235 on the same 264 lattice used in our above glueball calculations. For completeness we have also carried out some calculations on 18326 and 34326 lattices at the same value of . In SU(8) we work at  = 46.70 on a 16324 lattice which, again, is the same as that used in our glueball calculations. The spatial volumes at larger N are smaller than those at smaller N, taking advantage of the expected suppression of finite volume corrections with increasing N, and this is the reason for this additional calculation in SU(8).
We calculate correlators of the double trace operators with each other as well as with the single trace operators, since all of these are needed in the variational calculation using the basis that combines single and double trace operators. Because we need high statistics for glueball calculations, we calculate the correlators at the same time as we generate the lattice fields. At that stage we do not know the values of the vacuum subtractions in eqn(29) and so we need to calculate a number of other correlators so that at the later analysis stage we can reconstruct the desired subtracted correlators. The relevant expressions are given in Appendix B.
We begin with our SU(3) calculation. In Fig. 22 we show the effective masses of the lightest few states in the A+1 + representation obtained using the basis of single trace operators (open circles) and the same basis extended with our double trace operators (filled points). We see quite clearly that the two sets of states match each other well except for one state, whose effective masses are represented by a , and which clearly has no partner amongst the states from the single trace basis. This state appears to asymptote, at larger t, to an energy that is close to twice the lightest A+1 + mass, i.e. that of the lightest free two glueball state, and so we infer that this is indeed the lightest two glueball state. Apart from this state, the lightest 4 states in the two bases match each other quite precisely. That is to say, we have good evidence that the A+1 + continuum masses listed in Table 34 are indeed those of single glueball states.
It is interesting to ask what kind of A+1 + energy spectrum one obtains if one uses a basis consisting only of the double trace operators. The result is shown in Fig. 23. We see that the state that is lightest at small t is consistent with being the lightest 2 glueball state, and that our variational wave-functional has a good overlap onto that state. What is equally interesting is the state that is the first excited state at small t and whose effective mass drops monotonically below that of our two glueball state as t increases, consistent with heading towards the mass of the lightest glueball. This presumably represents the overlap of our double trace basis onto the lightest glueball. A rough estimate suggests that this variationally selected operator has an overlap (squared) of  10% which again points to little mixing of scattering states into our low-lying glueball spectrum.
31

Clearly we would like to repeat our above analysis of the A+1 + spectrum for all the other representations. However once the lightest state in some RP C representation is much heavier
than in the above case the energy of the predicted scattering state lies in a dense part of the spectrum, all the energies have much larger statistical errors and we cannot follow the effective energies beyond the smallest values of t. That is to say, the analysis becomes hopelessly
ambiguous. We will therefore restrict ourselves to a few cases where the energies are still manageably small. That is to say, we will look at the T2++ which contains 3 components of the lightest J = 2++ state, the A-1 + where the lightest state is the interesting 0-+ pseudoscalar (the lightest P = - glueball), the E-+ where the lightest state is the 2-+ pseudotensor, and the T1+- which is the lightest C = - state and where the lightest 3 component state is the C = - vector. We do not analyse any R-- states since they are all too heavy.
We begin with the T2++ representation. Here our double trace operator would project onto a two glueball state consisting of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueballs if there were no mixing. Neglecting interactions its energy is just the sum of these masses. This case differs from the A+1 + representation discussed above because this is not the lightest scattering state one can construct. Two A+1 + glueballs with two units of angular momentum are lighter, although one can expect an angular momentum threshold suppression factor that would need to be quantified. Such a state requires the use of operators with non-zero momentum which would
mean extending our basis of operators well beyond our choice for this exploratory study. It is plausible that what we learn using our heavier two glueball states would also apply to these lighter ones. So in Fig. 24 we show for the T2++ representation the analogue of Fig. 22 for the A+1 +. Once again we see that the inclusion of our double trace operators leads to an extra state, labelled by , although because of the denser packing of the states it is less prominent than in the A+1 + case. However the effective energy of this state is consistent with decreasing towards that of a scattering state composed of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueball, albeit with substantial statistical uncertainty. So it is very plausible that it is a scattering state composed of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueballs. The spectrum from the double trace basis is shown in Fig. 25 Here we see quite clearly that the state that is lightest at small t has an energy roughly equal to the sum of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueballs, showing it to be a scattering state. It is also clear that the projection of these double trace operators onto the lightest T2++ glueball is very small. All this makes it plausible that the six lighter states in Fig. 24 are
single glueballs. However we recall our above caveat that there are lighter scattering states that could, in principle, behave differently.
With the T1+- representation our double trace operators project onto the lightest two glueball state since the lightest T1+- is the lightest C = - state. In Fig. 26 we see that the addition of the double trace operators to the single trace basis does produce an extra state
and that the effective energy of that state appears to be decreasing towards the energy of the lightest scattering state, up to the point where the errors grow too large to allow a statement. From this plot we infer that the lightest five T1+- states obtained using the single trace basis are not scattering states. In Fig. 27 we show the spectrum obtained using just the double trace operators. We see that the lightest state appears to approach the expected scattering state and that there apears to be no significant component of the lightest single glueballs present
in this basis, providing further evidence for little overlap between our single and double trace
32

operators. In the case of the A-1 + representation our double trace operators naturally project onto a
state with both an A+1 + and an A-1 + glueball. Just as for the A+1 + this should be the lightest possible scattering state: although one can obtain P = - through unit angular momentum one would need a glueball with non-zero spin to take us back to an overall A1 state. We show in Fig. 28 how the inclusion of our double trace operators affects the spectrum. While the ground and first excited states are unaffected, there is clearly an extra state just above these, and a significant shift in the mass of the next state above this. The effective energy of the (probable) extra state descends rapidly towards the energy of the free scattering state, but the rapidly growing errors prevent us from telling if it asymptotes to this value or continues to decrease. For further evidence we plot in Fig. 29 the spectrum obtained in the basis with only the double trace operators. Here we have a quite dramatic contrast to what we have seen above in the A+1 +, T2++ and T1+- representations: the lightest state is clearly the ground state of the single trace spectrum. This tells us that here we have a large overlap between single trace and double trace operators. So here we can have legitimate concerns about the presence of multiglueball states in the low-lying spectrum obtained using single trace operators.
The E-+ representation contains the second lightest state in the P, C = -, + sector, after the A-1 + ground state. Neglecting interactions, our double trace operators would project onto the two glueball states composed of an A+1 + and an E-+ glueball. There are scattering states that are slightly lighter but they should have angular momentum threshold factors that effectively cancel that advantage. (For example, the lightest A+1 + and A-1 + glueballs with two units of angular momentum.) In Fig. 30 we see that the addition of the double trace operators to the single trace basis does produce an extra state. However this state is nearly degenerate with another state so it is unclear which is the extra one. (It is quite possible that our variational procedure mixes the two.) In either case the effective energy of that state appears to be decreasing towards the energy of the lightest scattering state, up to the point where the errors grow too large to allow a statement. The spectrum of states with just the double trace basis, shown in Fig. 31, shows quite clearly that the lightest state is the scattering state and that there is no significant overlap of our double trace operators onto the low-lying spectrum obtained with the single trace operators.
In summary, the above study in SU(3) shows that two glueball states have very little overlap onto most of the spectrum one obtains from single trace operators for the lighter and hence most interesting states in our calculated glueball spectra. This is something of a surprise in SU(3) since one would not expect to be able to invoke a large-N suppression for N = 3. The one apparent exception concerns the A-1 + representation which contains the 0-+ pseudoscalar which is of particular theoretical interest. This clearly merits a much more detailed investigation.
We now turn to a similar study in SU(8). This we should do since for N  8 we use considerably smaller spatial volumes than for SU(3), taking advantage of the expected largeN suppression of finite volume corrections. We perform our study on a 16324 lattice at  = 46.70 which corresponds to a lattice spacing that is slightly larger than that of the above SU(3) study if measured in units of the string tension, , although equal when measured in units of the mass gap. Our results are very much the same as for SU (3): in the A+1 +, T2++, T1+-
33

and E-+ representations there appear to be very small overlaps between our would-be two
glueball operators and the single trace operators in the low-lying part of the spectrum that is of interest to us in this paper. The striking exception, as in the case of SU(3), is the A-1 + representation. This is intriguing both because this representation contains the interesting JP C = 0-+ pseudoscalar glueball and because one would have naively expected the large-N
suppression of such overlaps between single and double trace operators to have taken effect
by N = 8. There is perhaps some hint of this in comparing the approaches to the respective A-1 + masses of the ground states.
These results for SU(3) and SU(8) provide some reassurance that our spectra in the
glueball calculations of this paper are indeed those of single glueballs, at least for the lower
lying spectrum that is of the greatest physical and theoretical interest.

6 Topological fluctuations

Euclidean D = 4 SU(N) gauge fields possess non-trivial topological properties, characterised by a topological charge Q which is integer-valued in a space-time volume with periodic boundary conditions. This charge can be expressed as the integral over Euclidean space-time of a topological charge density, Q(x), where

Q(x)

=

1 32

2

µ

Tr{Fµ

(x)F

(x)}.

(30)

Since the plaquette matrix Uµ(x) = 1 + a2Fµ(x) + .... on sufficiently smooth fields, one can write a lattice topological charge density QL(x) on such fields as

QL(x)



1 322

µ

Tr{Uµ

(x)U

(x)}

=

a4Q(x) +

O(a6).

(31)

However this definition lacks the reflection antisymmetry of the continuum operator in eqn(30),
since all the plaquettes Uµ(x) are defined as forward going in terms of our coordinate basis, so to recover these symmetry properties we use the version of this operator that is antisym-
metrised with respect to forward and backward directions [51] (although this is unnecessary on smooth fields).
The fluctuations of QL(x) are related to the expectation value of the composite operator Q2L(x) whose operator product expansion contains the unit operator [51], so these fluctuations are powerlike in 1/. On the other hand, the average of QL(x) is O(a4) and hence exponentially suppressed in . Thus as  increases the fluctuations around QL(x) and QL = x QL(x) diverge compared to the physically interesting mean values. In addition the composite operator QL(x) also receives a multiplicative renormalisation Z() such that Z()  1 at accessible values of  [52].
In practice all this means that one cannot extract the topological charge of a typical lattice gauge field by directly calculating QL = x QL(x) on that gauge field. However we note that the fluctuations obscuring the value of Q are ultraviolet, while the physically relevant topological charge is on physical length scales. Thus if we perform a very limited local

34

smoothening of the fields to suppress the ultraviolet fluctuations, this should not affect physics on long distance scales, and the value of QL = x QL(x) calculated on these smoothened fields should provide a reliable estimate of Q. Moreover, recalling that the total topological charge of a gauge field is unchanged under smooth deformations, we can expect that even under a moderately large amount of continued smoothening the value of QL will not change, even though QL(x) itself does gradually change. One convenient way to smoothen the gauge fields is to locally minimise the action. Such a `cooling' of the original `hot' lattice gauge field [53] involves sweeping through the lattice one link at a time, precisely like the Monte Carlo except that one chooses the new link matrix to be the one that minimises the total action of the plaquettes containing that link matrix. This is a standard technique that one can find described in more detail in, for example, [54]. An alternative and attractive smoothing method with perturbatively proven renormalisation properties is the gradient flow [55, 56, 57] which has been shown to be numerically equivalent to cooling [58, 59, 60]. Cooling typically performs nearly two orders of magnitude faster than the gradient flow and since we are aiming for large statistics we adopt the simplest cooling method. After the first couple of cooling sweeps the fields are already quite smooth, as we shall see below. Since we are minimising the action and since in the continuum the minimum action field with a given Q is a multi-instanton field, we expect that under systematic cooling the lattice field will be driven to become some multiinstanton field, which one can see by calculating the distribution QL(x) on such a field. Of course, because of the discretisation of space-time the topological properties of lattice fields are only approximately like those of a continuum field. One can deform a large instanton by gradually shrinking its non-trivial core and on a lattice this core can shrink to within a hypercube. At this point what was an instanton has been transformed into a gauge singularity and the value of Q will now differ from its original value by one unit. (Equally, one can gradually grow an instanton out of a hypercube.) This process can occur during cooling but it can equally occur during the course of our Monte Carlo. In the latter case, it is these changes in Q that allow us to sample all possible values of Q and hence maintain the ergodicity in Q of our Markov process. As   the distance between physical and ultraviolet scales grows and these changes in Q become increasingly suppressed ­ in fact more strongly than the usual critical slowing down (see below). This is as it should be: after all, the changes in topological charge are no more than a (useful) lattice artifact.
We have outlined in Section 2.4 the specific reasons for the suppression of changes in QL when a()  0 at fixed N and when N   at fixed a(), and how we deal with this problem in our glueball and string tension calculations. Below, in Section 6.1, we will give some evidence that the value of QL on a cooled lattice field does indeed reflect the topology of the original lattice field. Then, in Section 6.2, we will give some results on the rate of critical slowing down, both as a()  0 and as N  . In Section 6.3 we present our results for the continuum topological susceptibility in those cases, 2  N  6, where the topological freezing is not too serious an obstacle. Finally in Section 6.4 we present our numerical results for the factor Z() that relates the value of QL before cooling to its value, QI, after cooling. Our study of lattice topology has some limitations of course: it is not a dedicated study but is constrained by being a byproduct of our glueball and string tension calculations. Finally we remark that it is only in the calculations of the topological susceptibility that the topological
35

freezing is an obstacle; in our other calculations in this Section it does not matter whether the topological charge we study is introduced by hand or appears spontaneously.
6.1 topology and cooling
As we cool our lattice fields the fluctuations in the measured value of QL decrease and it rapidly settles down to a value that is close to an integer. As a typical example we plot in Fig.32 the number of fields with a given topological charge QL after 2 coolings sweeps and the number after 20 cooling sweeps, taken from sequences of SU(5) fields on a 16320 lattice at  = 17.63. With respect to the calculations in this paper, this corresponds to an intermediate value of N, and of a(), and of the lattice volume. As we see, after 20 cooling sweeps the values of QL are very strongly peaked close to integer values. The reason that the peak is not at an integer, even when the cooling has erased the high frequency fluctuations, is that for an instanton of size  on a lattice, we only obtain QL  1 in the limit /a  , with deviations from unity that are powers of a/. However, as is clear from Fig.32, there is no significant ambiguity in assigning to each field after 20 cooling sweeps an integer valued topological charge which we label QI. We can expect QI to provide our most reliable estimate of the topological charge Q of the original lattice gauge field. For the calculations with the largest values of a() identifying the value QI can be less clear-cut, but such lattices are of little importance in determining continuum physics. We also see from Fig.32 that even after only 2 cooling sweeps the fields fall into groups that only overlap slightly. Since 2 sweeps cannot affect anything other than the most local fluctuations, we can assume that this segregation into differing topological sectors directly reflects the topology of the gauge fields prior to any cooling.
As a second example we show in Fig.33 the same type of plot for several sequences of SU(8) fields generated at  = 47.75 on a 20330 lattice. This corresponds to our smallest lattice spacing in SU(8). Here we see an even sharper peaking after 20 cooling sweeps and, more interestingly, a very clear separation between the various sectors even after only 2 cooling sweeps. In contrast to the SU(5) example, in this case there is essentially no tunnelling between topological sectors, and the observed distribution of Q has been imposed on the starting configurations for the various sequences.
The loss of ergodicity with respect to the topological charge is illustrated for SU(8) in Fig.34 where we show the values of QL after 2 and 20 cooling sweeps taken every 100 Monte Carlo sweeps for two sequences of 50000 sweeps generated at  = 47.75. In one sequence we gave QL  1 and in the other we have QL  2. It is interesting that even after only 2 cooling sweeps the separation in the measured values of QL is unambiguous. A similar plot for SU(5) fields generated at  = 17.63 is shown in Fig.35. Here the value of QL remains unchanged over subsequences that are typically a few thousand sweeps long, but the changes are sufficiently frequent that in our overall ensemble of  2 × 106 fields we may regard QL as ergodic. But just as for SU(8) the values of QL after only 2 cooling sweeps track the values after 20 cooling sweeps.
The close relationship that we observe in Fig.34 and Fig.35 between the values of QL after 2 and 20 cooling sweeps is confirmed explicitly in Fig.36. Here we have taken all the  = 47.75
36

SU(8) fields on which we have calculated QL and we have extracted the three subsets that correspond to QL  1, 2, 3 after 20 cooling sweeps. For each subset we plot the values that QL takes on fields after 2 cooling sweeps. As we see in Fig.36 the three distributions do not overlap. So we can assign to each field a value of Q that is completely unambiguous (at least

for our statistics) on the basis of the value of QL measured after only 2 cooling sweeps, where the long-distance physics should be essentially unchanged from that of the original uncooled

lattice fields. As an aside, we show in Fig.37 the same plot as in Fig.36, but with values of QL calculated after only 1 cooling sweep. Here the distributions are broader, so that one can no

longer use the value of QL to unambiguously assign the field its value of Q, but the fact that even after 1 cooling sweep the values of QL strongly reflect the value of Q after 20 cooling sweeps is evident.

It is instructive to see how the measured values of QL vary with the number of cooling sweeps nc. As an example, we take an ensemble of fields that have a topological charge Q = 2, as determined by the value of QL after 20 cooling sweeps. For this same ensemble we calculate how the average value of QL varies with nc and also how the standard deviation of

its fluctuations vary with nc. These quantities, labelled QL and QL respectively, are shown in Table 48 for three different values of  in SU(8). As we see, in the uncooled (nc = 0) fields the fluctuations QL are so large compared to the average charge Q¯L(nc = 0) of those
fields, that one cannot hope to estimate for individual fields the true value of Q from the

value of QL at nc = 0. However we also see that even after only 1 cooling sweep the value of Q¯L/QL increases by a factor  20 and after 2 cooling sweeps by  80, so that one can, with rapidly increasing reliability, assign a value of Q to an individual field on the basis of the

value of QL(nc) at the first few cooling sweeps. What we also see in Table 48 is that beyond the lowest few values of nc there is little difference between the 3 ensembles, despite the fact that the lattice spacing changes by a factor  1.7. For larger nc the value of QL(nc) decreases slightly with decreasing  as one expects because the typical instanton size will decrease in

lattice units and the discretisation corrections are negative. For nc = 0 the decrease in QL is larger and reflects the -dependence of the renormalisation factor Z() which is driven

by high frequency fluctuations, as analysed more quantitatively in Section 6.4. The rapid

increase of QL with increasing  is driven by two competing factors: the high frequency fluctuations per lattice site decrease as an inverse power of , but since these fluctuations

are roughly uncorrelated across lattice sites, there is a factor proportional to the square root

of the lattice volume in lattice units which increases exponentially with  if our volumes are

roughly constant in physical units. At larger  the latter factor will dominate and it therefore

becomes rapidly harder to relate Q from QL(nc = 0) as we approach the continuum limit. On the other hand, after the first few cooling sweeps the high frequency fluctuations have

been largely erased and the fluctuations of QL no longer increase with increasing , so that it

becomes easier to identify the value of Q from the value of QL.

for

As a footnote to different SU(N)

the above we groups. The

show in Table 49 the same calculations are at roughly

quantities as in the same value

Tofaable 48asbufotrntohwe

SU(8) fields at  = 46.70 in Table 48, i.e. at roughly the same value of the 't Hooft coupling,

so that the contribution of the high frequency fluctuations is roughly the same. So, as we

see, the variation in QL(nc = 0) with N is consistent with being due to the difference in the

37

square root of the lattice volumes. At larger nc the value of QL(nc) decreases with increasing N, which tells us that larger-scale non-perturbative fluctuations, such as in the instanton size,
are decreasing. Finally, the main practical point is that there is very little variation with N of QL at any value of nc.

6.2 tunneling between topological sectors

In the continuum theory Q cannot change under continuous deformations of the fields unlike

most other quantities, such as glueball correlation functions, so one expects to lose ergodicity

in Q much faster than in such other quantities as one approaches the continuum limit in a

lattice calculation using a local Monte Carlo algorithm such as the heat bath. In this section

we shall provide our data on this `freezing' of Q as a function of a and N and then compare

this to some theoretical expectations.

As described earlier, the value of Q changes if the core of an instanton shrinks and dis-

appears within a hypercube (or the reverse of this process). When a is small enough such

instantons can be described by dilute gas calculations since these very small instantons are

very rare and the effect on them of other background field fluctuations that exist on physical

length scales will be negligible. So the basic process is for Q to change by one unit. Therefore

we use as our measure of topological freezing the average number of sweeps between changes of

Q by one unit. We call this Q. Since the probability of such a process is clearly proportional to the space-time volume, which is not something we have tried to keep constant in our calcu-

lations, we to be V0 =

rle4scwailtehoulr me=as3u.r0e,dsvoatluheast

of Q to we can

a standard physical compare the results

volume, which we choose of different calculations.

Our calculations of Q have not been performed after every sweep, but typically with gaps of

25 or 50 or 100 sweeps depending on the calculation. Our estimates of Q can only be reliable if they are much larger than this gap, since otherwise there could be multiple changes of Q

within the gaps that we are missing, and so we do not includes those ensembles where this

issue arises ­ typically at the coarser lattice spacings. However even if Q appears to be much

larger than the gap, we will occasionally see that Q, the change in Q across a gap, is greater

than unity. In this case we assume that there have been |Q| jumps within the gap and we

make that part of our final estimate of Q. In practice this makes a very small difference to our results. By counting the number of changes of Q in our total sequence of lattice fields we

can obtain the average distance between such changes, Q, once we have renormalised to our standard volume V0.
As Q   the above definition is adequate. However when Q is not very large one can worry about the unwanted contribution of near-dislocations that occur across a measurement

of Q. We have in mind a small instanton that appears out of a hypercube shortly before a

measurement, survives the cooling (because of its environment) and so contributes to the value

of Q, but then quickly disappears without becoming a larger physical instanton long before the

next measurement. In a sequence of measurements of Q such an event would be characterised

by a jump Q = ±1 at one measurement followed by the opposite jump, Q = 1, at the next

measurement. Of course it could be that when this happens we are seeing two independent

events, with an instanton appearing from one hypercube and after the measurement an anti-

38

instanton appearing out of a quite different hypercube. The characteristic of the latter events is that the signs of the changes in Q at neighbouring measurements are uncorrelated. Correcting for these we obtain the measure ~Q (normalised to our standard volume) which excludes this estimate of near-dislocations. Whether this estimate is entirely reliable is arguable, so it is reassuring that the differences between ~Q and Q are not large, and which one we use does not alter our conclusions below.
We present in Table 50 our results for Q and ~Q from the sequences of fields generated in our glueball and string tension calculations. The excluded values of  either correspond to cases where Q is not much larger than the gap between measurements, and this includes all of our SU(2) calculations, or where Q has become so large that we see no changes in Q at all, which includes almost all of our SU(10) and SU(12) calculations. The prominent qualitative features of our results are that for any given gauge group both Q and ~Q increase rapidly as a() decreases and, at roughly equal values of a(), they increase rapidly as N increases.
One can formulate some theoretical expectations for the behaviour of Q as one decreases a and increases N. Just before shrinking through a hypercube an instanton will be very small with size   a where the number density, D()d can be estimated using the standard semiclassical formula [20]

D()



1 5

1 g4N

exp

-

82 g2()

N  

1 5

exp

-

g

82 2()N

N

=a

11N
(a) 3

-5

,

(32)

where  is the dynamical length scale of the theory. This is of course a very asymptotic expression: we have neglected the powers of g because they only contribute powers of log(a), and we have used the 1-loop expression for g2(a) which is, as we have seen in Section 4, inadequate for our range of bare couplings. We also note that this expression only tells us what is the probability of a very small instanton. In addition there will be a factor for the small instanton with   O(a) to finally shrink completely within a hypercube: this `tunneling event' may contribute an important factor depending on the lattice action being used.
The first qualitative feature of eqn(32) is that if we increase N at fixed a, we should find

Q



1 D()



1 a

11N 3

-5

- ln{Q} = b + cN,

(33)

wwvaehluehreaesvceofdsoNemp.eenTtdhhseasotencaotrrhereefsovpraolNnude =otof3a,a4lma, n5od,s6tbaeiqtsuasaolmvealuuen0sd.1eo5tfeaarnmdinf,eoadrnNcdohn=estn8ac,ne1t0.o,fI1an2oa,utaracrsoimssuslaetv0ie.o3rna3sl. In Fig. 38 we plot the values of ln{~Q} against N and we see that the behaviour is roughly linear as predicted from eqns(32,33).
The second qualitative feature of eqn(33) is that if we vary a at fixed N, we should find

Q



1 D()



1 a

11N 3

-5

- ln{Q} = b +

11N 3

-

5

ln

1 a

.

(34)

 In Fig. 39 we show plots of ln{Q} versus ln{1/a } for N  [3, 8] and we see that the plots are

roughly linear as predicted by eqns(32,34). (As an aside, the fact that the SU(2) values of Q

39

never become large enough to predicted by eqn(34) is quite

be useful weak, Q

is no surprise given that the asymptotic  a7/3.) The fitted coefficients of the

dependence ln{1/a }

term are listed in Table 51 and compared to the value in eqn(34). We do not expect a good

agreement since we know that the one loop expression for g2(a) is a poor approximation in

our range of bare couplings but it is interesting that our calculated values listed in Table 51

do reflect the trend of the asymptotic theoretical values.

6.3 topological susceptibility

The simplest topological quantity that one can calculate is the topological susceptibility, t = Q2 /V , where V is the space-time volume. This is a particularly interesting quantity because of the way it enters into estimates of the physical  mass through the WittenVeneziano sum rule [62, 63]. There have been many calculations of this quantity and here we will add to these our calculations for the gauge groups SU(2), SU(3), SU(4), SU(5) and for those of our SU(6) ensembles where there are enough fluctuations in the value of Q to make an estimate plausible.
We typically calculate the topological charge Q after every 25 or 50 or 100 Monte Carlo sweeps on most of the lattice ensembles that we use for our glueball and/or string tension calculations. We estimate the value of Q from the value of the lattice QL after 20 cooling sweeps. The assignment of an integer value, QI, after 20 cooling sweeps is, as we have seen, largely unambiguous. In Tables 52, 53 and 54 we list our values for Q2 on the lattices and at the couplings shown.
To obtain the continuum limit we perform a conventional extrapolation

1

1

t4 

=

t4 

+ ca2,

a

0

(35)

where we systematically remove from the fit the values corresponding to the largest a until we get an acceptable fit. We show the resulting continuum extrapolations for N = 2, 3, 4, 5 in Fig.40 and list the resulting continuum values in Table 55. For SU(2) and SU(3) we do not include the value at the smallest a since it is clearly too low and it is plausible that it is due to a gradual loss of ergodicity in Q accompanied by an increasingly unreliable estimate of the errors. We see from Fig.40 that As we increase N our fits are able to include values from increasingly coarse a(). This is presumably related to the fact that the `bulk' crossover/transition between strong and weak coupling becomes rapidly sharper as N increases [14]. (It is particularly smooth for SU(2).) As shown in Table 55 all the fits are acceptable. We have performed separate continuum extrapolations of the susceptibilities obtained from the non-integer lattice charges, QL, and the integer charges, QI , labelling these L and I respectively. In the continuum limit these should be the same and we see from Table 55 that this is indeed so, within errors, for all except the case of SU(2), where the difference between the two values can be taken as a systematic error that is additional to the statistical errors.
Once we have the continuum susceptibilites we can extrapolate them to N =  as shown

40

in Fig.41:

1

I4 = 0.3681(28) + 0.471(15),

(36)



N2

N

and

1

L4 

=

0.3655(27)

+

0.448(15) N2

.

(37)

N

The two are within errors as one would expect. We note that this value is consistent within

errors with the N =  extrapolation in [64] which uses a novel technique [65] for ameliorating

the problem of topological freezing.

Finally we return to the case of SU(3) since it also has some phenomenological interest.

Here our analysis differs slightly from our earlier analysis in [10] and our final result

1

I4

= 0.4246(36)

(38)



SU (3)

is about one standard deviation higher. To transform this into physical units we translate from units in terms of  to the standard scale r0 and then to MeV units just as we did in eqn(22) of Section 4.2, giving



1

r0  = 1.160(6) = I4 = 206(4)MeV.

(39)

This

is

within

errors

of

the

value

we

presented

in

[10]

and

the

value

1
I4

S=U 3

208(6)MeV

obtained 1

in [66] using the gradient flow technique. As an aside we note that the value of I4 /  at

N = , as given in eqn(36), is  13% lower than the SU(3) value, i.e.  179`MeV' if we

simply rescale the value in eqn(39).

6.4 ZQ() and lattice  parameter
Consider the ensemble of Monte Carlo lattice gauge fields that correspond to an integer valued topological charge Q. If we calculate the charge QL of each of these fields, prior to any cooling, the average value will be related to Q by [52]

< QL >= ZQ()Q,

(40)

where ZQ() will depend (weakly) on N and negligibly on the lattice volume (as long as it is not very small). Since the deviation of ZQ() from unity is driven by high frequency lattice

fluctuations, it is of little physical interest in itself. However its value is important if, for

example, one wishes to study the  dependence of the theory by adding a term iQ to the

continuum action and, correspondingly, a term iLQL to the lattice action, since one sees that

[67]

L  ZQ-1().

(41)

41

Primarily for this reason we have calculated ZQ() in our lattice calculations and will also provide interpolating functions that will give ZQ() at values of  that lie between our measured values.
A first estimate for ZQ() can be obtained in perturbation theory, giving at one loop [52]

ZQ()

=

1

- (0.6612N 2

-

0.5)

1 

+

O(-2)

(42)

which already tells us that for our range of  we will have ZQ()  1. The fact that the one loop correction is so large tells us that the one loop estimate is likely to be not very accurate, and indeed that proves to be the case. Moreover as we increase the lattice spacing the typical instanton becomes smaller and the value of QL acquires significant corrections that are powers of a() and which are additional to any perturbative corrections. So in constructing our interpolating function for ZQ we simply use the form

ZQint() = 1 - z0g2N - z1(g2N )2

;

g2N

=

2N 

2

,

(43)

where g2N is the 't Hooft coupling, and we make no attempt to constrain the parameters z0 and z1 to perturbative values. This turns out to be an adequate fitting function to our values of ZQ(). It is however important to note that while this works as an interpolating function, it is likely to fail increasingly badly the further one uses it away from the fitted range of  as
an extrapolating function.
Our values for ZQ() are obtained from fits such as those shown in Fig.42, and are listed in Tables 56 and 57. Interpolating these values with eqn(43) gives the values for z0 and z1 listed in Table 58. Physically the most relevant interpolating function is the one for SU(3):

ZQint() s=u3 1 - 0.162(10)g2N - 0.0425(31)(g2N )2 , 2/ndf = 0.62

(44)

In the case of SU(2) we have only a few entries because most of our earliest calculations did

not include calculating QL on the fields prior to cooling. In addition in the case of SU(2) the identification of an integer Q after 20 cooling sweeps possesses small but significant ambigu-

ities, which rapidly disappear as N increases. We can also fit our interpolating functions in

N, thus obtaining

z0

=

0.179(12)

-

0.08(15) N2

,

2/ndf = 1.00

(45)

and

z1

=

0.0482(46)

-

0.072(50) N2

,

2/ndf = 1.13

(46)

which should be reliable over a wide range of N as long as we are not too far outside the range of the t'Hooft coupling  = g2N of our calculations in Tables 56 and 57. Finally we remind

the reader that all these results for ZQ() only apply to calculations with the standard Wilson plaquette action and with the definition of the lattice topological charge QL used here.

42

7 Conclusions
Our primary goal in this paper has been to calculate the glueball spectra of a range of SU(N) gauge theories, in the continuum limit, with enough precision to obtain plausible extrapolations to the theoretically interesting N =  limit. Our results, for N = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, were obtained using standard lattice gauge theory methods, but modified to finesse the issue of topological `freezing' at larger N, and/or small a(), by explicitly imposing the expected distribution of topological charge on the starting lattice fields of our ensemble of Monte Carlo sequences. We employed a large basis of single-trace glueball operators, which allowed us to calculate the ground state and some excited states for each of the RP C channels, where R labels the representation of the rotation symmetry group appropriate to our cubic lattice, and P, C label the parity and charge conjugation. The large basis gives us confidence that we are not missing any low-lying states and this in turn allows us to match near-degeneracies between states with different R so as to assign continuum spin quantum numbers to a significant number of glueball states.
Our results have greatly extended existing calculations while largely confirming earlier results; in particular the important conclusion that SU(3) is `close to' SU(). As before, one finds that the lightest glueball is the JP C = 0++ scalar ground state, with a mass that ranges from M0++  3.41  for SU (3) to M0++  3.07  for SU (), where  is the string tension, and that the next heavier glueballs are the tensor with a mass M2++  1.5M0++, and the pseudoscalar, 0-+, which is nearly degenerate with the tensor. One then has the 1+- with M1+-  1.85M0++, and this is the only relatively light C = - state. At roughly the same mass is the first excited 0++ and then the lightest pesudotensor with M2-+  1.95M0++. All other states are heavier than twice the lightest scalar, with most of the C = - ground states being very much heavier than that. One sees a number of near-degerenacies which may or may not be significant. The continuum glueball masses (in units of the string tension) for the various RP C channels are listed in Tables 33-41 and for the JP C channels in Tables 44-47.
Since our calculations are on a finite spatial volume we have had to identify and exclude the `ditorelon' states composed of a pair of mutually conjugate flux tubes that wind around our periodic spatial torus. These are states whose projection onto our single trace operators will vanish as N  . We also need to exclude any multiglueball scattering states. Our (albeit partial) explicit calculations using the corresponding double trace operators strongly suggest that these states do not appear in the glueball spectra that we claim to obtain using our single trace basis.
In calculating the glueball spectra we have also calculated a number of other quantities that could be calculated simultaneously. Our calculations of the string tension were primarily intended to provide a scale in which to express our glueball masses. However they also provided a scale for the lattice spacing a at each value of the bare lattice coupling, gL(a), which we were able to use to obtain values of the dynamical scale MS for all our values of N . These improved upon earlier calculations of this kind and for SU(3) provided a value in physical units of MS  263(4)[9]MeV which is consistent with values obtained using more dedicated methods At the same time we were able to confirm that keeping fixed the running 't Hooft coupling g2(a)N, with a being kept fixed in units of the string tension, is the way to approach
43

the N =  limit along lines of constant physics. In addition to the fundamental string tension we calculate the tension of k = 2 flux tubes,
in order to analyse the way that k=2/ approaches N = . We find that a leading O(1/N ) correction works better than the O(1/N2) expected from standard large-N counting, but that the latter cannot be completely excluded. We speculate that the O(1/N) behaviour is subasymptotic, with the O(1/N2) correction settling in once N is large enough that the k = 2 flux tube becomes a pair of weakly interacting fundamental flux tubes.
Since it is important for our glueball calculations to monitor the onset of the freezing of the topology of our lattice fields, we have performed extensive calculations of the topological charge along with the glueball calculations. Using these calculations we obtain values for the continuum limit of the topological susceptibility for the SU(N  6) gauge theories. The freezing of topology means that we have no values for N > 6 or for our smaller SU(6) lattice spacings. Nonetheless this does not prevent us achieving a usefully precise value of the N = 
1 topological suseptibility, I4 /  = 0.3681(28). We have also calculated the renormalisation factor ZQ() that relates the value of our particular (but standard) lattice topological charge, as obtained on the Monte carlo generated lattice gauge fields, to the true integer valued topological charge of those fields. This is useful if one wishes to include a topological -term in the action, and so we also include functions that interpolate between our values of . We can do so for all our SU(N) groups because these calculations can be equally well determined using ensembles of fields where the topological charge has been inserted through the initial fields of the Markovian chains.
The present study could be improved in several ways. A systematic study of ditorelon states and the lightest multiglueball states for all RP C sectors would be useful. The heaviest states need a finer resolution in the correlation functions for the mass identification to become completely unambiguous: this could be achieved by using an anisotropic lattice such that the timelike lattice spacing is much smaller than the spacelike one, a technique that has occasionally been put to good purpose in the past [68, 6, 9]. Perhaps most important would be the incorporation of more effective techniques for determining the continuum spins of the glueball states, as for example in [50] for 2 space dimensions and in [8] for our case here of 3 spatial dimensions.
Acknowledgements
AA has been financially supported by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme "Tips in SCQFT" under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 791122. MT acknowledges support by Oxford Theoretical Physics and All Souls College. The numerical computations were carried out on the computing cluster in Oxford Theoretical Physics.
44

A Lattice running couplings

For pure gauge theories the perturbative  function for the running coupling in a coupling

scheme s is given by

(gs)

=

-a

gs a

=

-b0gs3

-

b1gs5

- bs2gs7

+

...,

(47)

where a is the length scale on which the coupling is calculated and on which it depends. The

first two coefficients b0 and b1 are scheme independent while the coefficients bsj2 depend on the scheme. Integrating between scales a0 and a, we obtain

a = exp a0

- g(a) dg g(a0) (g)

.

(48)

(The label s on g is to be understood.) The integrand is singular as g  0 and for any calculations it is convenient to separate out the singular pieces. Since the issue arise for g  0 we can expand 1/(g) in powers of g and we then readily see that we can separate out the singular terms as follows,

a a0

=

e e +

g(a) g(a0 )

dg

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

-

g(a) g(a0 )

dg

1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

=

g2(a) g2(a0)

e -

b1 2b20

-

1 2b0

1 g2 (a)

-

1 g2 (a0

)

e-

g(a) g(a0 )

dg



1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

.

(49)

In the second line we have integrated the `singular' terms, and the remaining integral will now be finite as g(a0)  0. So we can break up the integral as

e-

g(a) g(a0 )

dg

1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

= e e +

g(a0 ) 0

dg

1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

-

g(a) 0

dg

1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

(50)

where each integral will be well-defined since the singularities at g = 0 have been removed. Separating the terms in a and a0 in eqns(49,50) we can write

a a0

=

F (g(a)) F (g(a0))

,

(51)

where we define

F (g)  b g e e . 0

2

-

b1 2b20

-

1 2b0 g2

-

g 0

dg

1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

(52)

Note that the factor of b0 that we have inserted in the first term on the right of eqn(52) will cancel in eqn(51) so we are free to insert it if we wish. We see from eqn(51) that a/F (g2(a))
is independent of the scale a on which the coupling is defined and is a constant. So we can
now define a dynamical energy scale  by





a0 F (g(a0))

=

a

=

1 

F

(g(a))

=

1 

b g e e 0

2

-

b1 2b20

-

1 2b0 g2

-

g(a) 0

dg



1 (g)

-

b1 b20 g

+

1 b0 g3

.

(53)

45

The scale  defined here coincides with the conventional  parameter that appears in the standard 2-loop expression for the running coupling. (It is to ensure this equality that we inserted the factor of b0 above.) This scale will clearly depend on the coupling scheme and within a given scheme the value we obtain for it will depend on our approximation to (g).
For our lattice action only the first 3 coefficients in the -function are known. In that case, collecting terms, it is convenient to rewrite eqn(53) as

a

3l=oop

1 

b g (a) e e 2 0

-

b1 2b20

-

2b0

1 g2 (a)

-

1 2

g2 0

(a)

dg2

b0 b2 -b21 -b1 b2 g2 b30 +b20 b1 g2 +b20 b2 g4



1 

F3l(g(a)),

(54)

where we denote by F3l(g) the 3-loop approximation to F (g). The integrand is a smooth function of g2 and so the integral can be calculated accurately for any given g(a) using any
elementary numerical integration method. If we retain only the first 2 coefficients of (g) then
we can do the integral analytically to obtain

a

2l=oop

1 e-

2b0

1 g(a)2

b1 b20

+

1 b0g2(a)

b1 2b20



1 

F2l

(g

(a))

(55)

as the exact 2-loop result, where we denote by F2l(g) the 2-loop approximation to F (g). The above perturbative expressions for a can be turned into expressions for aµ where µ
is some physical mass or energy:

aµ

=

a

µ 

a

=

µ 

(1 + cµa2µ2 + O(a4))F (g(a)),
a=0

(56)

where F (g(a)) is defined in eqn(52) and cµ is an unknown constant. Here we use the standard tree-level expansion for a dimensionless ratio of physical energy scales, which here is µ/. This

expression marries perturbative (logarithmic) and power-like dependences on a in a plausible

way. It is of course arguable: for example the perturbative expansion is at best asymptotic

and this tension,

cµan=intro,duacnedowtheerwpilol wderro-plikOe (cao4r)reacntidonhsi.ghInerproarcdteircetewremssh. alTl uhsaet

this for the string is to say we will

attempt to fit the calculated string tensions with

a

=

  

(1 + ca2)F3l(g(a))
a=0

(57)

and we shall be doing so in the mean-field coupling scheme s = I. To calculate F3l(g(a)) in

that scheme we only need to know the coefficient b2s=I, since b0 and b1 are scheme independent

with values

b0

=

1 (4)2

11 3

N,

b1

=

1 (4)4

34 3

N

2

.

(58)

We can begin with the well-known value of bs2=MS [69]

bM 2 S

=

1 (4)6

2857 54

N

3

.

(59)

46

To obtain bs2 in the improved lattice coupling scheme I we first transform to the plaquette action lattice coupling scheme, s = L, using [70]

bL2 = 2bM 2 S - b1l0 + b0l1,

(60)

where

l0

=

1 8N

- 0.16995599N,

l1

=

-

3 128N

2

+

0.018127763

-

0.0079101185N 2.

(61)

The lattice coupling, gL2 , satisfies the -function in eqn(47) with s = L, and the mean-field
coupling will satisfy a -function with the same b0 and b1 coefficients but with a different coefficient, bI2, of the g7 power. To determine bI2 one can use the expression for TrUp as a power series in gL2 to write gI2 as

gI2

= gL2

1 N

TrUp

= gL2

1 - w1gL2 - w2gL4 - ...

,

(62)

where [71]

w1

=

(N 2 - 8N

1)

,

w2 = N 2 - 1

0.0051069297

-

1 128N 2

.

(63)

We now insert the expression for gI2 in eqn(62) into the -function for gL2 in eqn(47) giving us, after some elementary manipulation,

bI2 = bL2 + w2b0 - w1b1.

(64)

So: using eqns(59,61) in eqn(60) we obtain the explicit expression for bL2 and then inserting that together with the functions in eqn(63) and eqn(58) into eqn(64) we obtain the explicit
expression for bI2 for any N . We now have the explicit expressions for b0, b1 and bI2 which allow us to calculate the value of F3l(gI(a)) in eqn(57) for any value of N and gI(a).

47

B Scattering states

We will restrict ourselves to states of two glueballs. We probe such states with product

operators a(t)b(t) where a and b are typical single loop zero momentum operators that are expected to project primarily onto single glueballs with chosen quantum numbers. Both

the individual and product operators will in general need vacuum subtraction for this to be

the case. As usual we will have some basis of single loop operators so the generic correlator

will be of the form

C4(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0)d(0) - ab cd ,

(65)

where a(t) = a(t) - a etc. This equation subtracts any vacuum contribution to the individual operators as well as to their products. We have taken the operators to be real. If,

for example, we were to include operators i(t), j(t) with opposite non-zero momenta then
these would be complex. In that case we should change a(t), b(t)  a(t), b(t) in eqn(65) and below.

Our glueball calculations require high statistics so we calculate our correlators during the

generation of the sequence of lattice fields. At this stage we can only calculate the correlators

of the fields  without any vacuum subtraction ­ we will only be able to calculate the vacuum

expectation values at the end of the computer simulation. A short calculation tells us that
the correlator of the i fields in eqn(65) can be written in terms of the correlators of the unsubtracted i fields as follows:

C4(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0)d(0) - a b(t)c(0)d(0) - b a(t)c(0)d(0) - c a(t)b(t)d(0) - d a(t)b(t)c(0) + a c b(t)d(0) + b c a(t)d(0) + a d b(t)c(0) + b d a(t)c(0)
- ab cd + 2 ab c d + 2 cd a b - 4 a b c d . (66)

Of course when some of the operators have non-vacuum quantum numbers, then the corresponding vacuum expectation values will vanish and the above expression will simplify in obvious ways.
In addition to the above we may also be interested in the overlap of single loop operators, which mainly project onto single glueballs, with the above product operators, which one expects to mainly project onto two glueballs. That is to say correlators such as

C3(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0) - ab c = a(t)b(t)c(0)

(67)

since c = 0 by definition. In terms of the unsubtracted operators we find

C3(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0) - a b(t)c(0) - b a(t)c(0) - c ab + 2 a b c . (68)

48

In this paper we can only calculate light masses with any reliability so we restrict ourselves to double loop operators where one loop is in the A+1 + representation and therefore has some projection onto the lightest glueball. The second operator will then be in the representation RP C in which we happen to be interested. If RP C = A+1 + then eqn(66) simplifies drastically

C4(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0)d(0) - a b(t)c(0)d(0) - c a(t)b(t)d(0) + a c b(t)d(0) - ab cd (69)

since with a, c being A+1 + and b, d not being A+1 + means that not only b = d = 0 but also that products like ab are zero. Similarly if a in eqn(67) is A+1 + and b is in some RP C = A+1 + then c must be in the same RP C = A+1 + for C3(t) not to be zero. In that case we will have

C3(t) = a(t)b(t)c(0) - a b(t)c(0) .

(70)

If however b and c are in A+1 + then we need the full expression.

49

References
[1] B. Lucini, M. Teper, `SU(N) gauge theories in four dimensions: exploring the approach to N = infinity', JHEP 0106:050,2001 [arXiv:hep-lat/0103027].
[2] B. Lucini, M. Teper, U. Wenger, `Glueballs and k-strings in SU(N) gauge theories: Calculations with improved operators', JHEP 0406:012,2004 [arXiv:hep-lat/0404008].
[3] B. Lucini, A. Rago, E. Rinaldi, `Glueball masses in the large N limit', JHEP 1008:119,2010 [arXiv:1007.3879].
[4] C. Michael, M. Teper, `The Glueball Spectrum in SU(3)', Nucl.Phys.B 314 (1989) 347
[5] G.S. Bali, K. Schilling, A. Hulsebos, A.C. Irving, C. Michael, P.W. Stephenson, `A comprehensive lattice study of SU(3) glueballs', Phys.Lett.B309(1993)378 [arXiv:hep-lat/9304012].
[6] C.J. Morningstar, M.J. Peardon, `The Glueball spectrum from an anisotropic lattice study', Phys.Rev.D 60 (1999) 034509 [arXiv:hep-lat/9901004].
[7] H.B. Meyer, M. Teper, `Glueball Regge trajectories and the Pomeron ­ a lattice study', Phys.Lett.B605(2005)344 [arXiv:hep-ph/0409183].
[8] H.B. Meyer, `Glueball Regge trajectories', Oxford D.Phil Thesis 2004 [arXiv:hep-lat/0508002].
[9] Y. Chen, A. Alexandru, S.J. Dong, T. Draper, I. Horvath, F.X. Lee, K.F. Liu, N. Mathur, C. Morningstar, M. Peardon, S. Tamhankar, B.L. Young, J.B. Zhang, `Glueball Spectrum and Matrix Elements on Anisotropic Lattices', Phys.Rev.D 73 (2006) 014516 [arXiv:hep-lat/0510074].
[10] A. Athenodorou, M. Teper, `The glueball spectrum of SU(3) gauge theory in 3+1 dimensions', JHEP 11 (2020) 172 [arXiv:2007.06422].
[11] M.G. Perez, A. Gonzalez-Arroyo, M. Okawa, `Meson spectrum in the large N limit', JHEP 04 (2021) 230 [arXiv:2011.13061].
[12] M.G. Perez, A. Gonzalez-Arroyo, M. Koren, M. Okawa, `The spectrum of 2+1 dimensional Yang-Mills theory on a twisted spatial torus', JHEP 07 (2018) 169 [arXiv:1807.03481].
[13] B. Lucini, M. Teper, U. Wenger, `The high temperature phase transition in SU(N) gauge theories ', JHEP 0401 (2004) 061 [arXiv:hep-lat/0307017].
[14] B. Lucini, M. Teper, U. Wenger, `Properties of the deconfining phase transition in SU(N) gauge theories', JHEP 0502 (2005) 033 [arXiv:hep-lat/0502003].
[15] N. Husung, P. Marquard, R. Sommer, `Asymptotic behavior of cutoff effects in Yang-Mills theory and in Wilson's lattice QCD', Eur.Phys.J.C. 80(2020)3,200, [arXiv:1912.08498].
50

[16] M. Teper, `An improved method for lattice glueball calculations', Phys. Lett. B183 (1987) 345.
[17] M. Teper, `The scalar and tensor glueball masses in lattice gauge theory', Phys. Lett. B185 (1987) 121.
[18] M. Lu¨scher, `Volume Dependence of the Energy Spectrum in Massive Quantum Field Theories. 1. Stable Particle States', Commun.Math.Phys. 104 (1986) 177.
[19] G. 't Hooft, `Computation of the quantum effects due to a four-dimensional pseudoparticle', Phys. Rev. D 14, 3432 (1976); Erratum Phys. Rev. D 18, 2199 (1978).
[20] S. Coleman, `The uses of instantons', Chapter 7 in `Aspects of Symmetry', Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[21] G. 't Hooft, `A planar diagram theory for strong interactions'. Nucl. Phys. B72 (1974) 461.
[22] S. Coleman, `1/N', Chapter 8 in `Aspects of Symmetry', Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[23] E. Witten, `Baryons in the 1/n expansion', Nucl.Phys.B 160 (1979) 57.
[24] E. Witten, `Instantons, the Quark Model, and the 1/n Expansion', Nucl.Phys.B 149 (1979) 285
[25] M. Teper, `Instantons and the 1/N expansion', Z.Phys.C 5 (1980) 233.
[26] L. Del Debbio, H. Panagopoulos, P. Rossi, E. Vicari, `k string tensions in SU(N) gauge theories ', Phys.Rev.D 65 (2002) 021501 [arXiv:hep-th/0106185].
[27] E. Witten, `Theta dependence in the large N limit of four-dimensional gauge theories ', Phys.Rev.Lett. 81 (1998) 2862 [arXiv:hep-th/9807109].
[28] L. Del Debbio, H. Panagopoulos, E.Vicari, `theta dependence of SU(N) gauge theories', JHEP 08 (2002) 044 [arXiv:hep-th/0204125].
[29] S. Aoki, H. Fukaya, S. Hashimoto, T. Onogi, `Finite volume QCD at fixed topological charge', Phys. Rev. D76 (2007) 054508, [arXiv:0707.0396].
[30] O. Aharony and Z. Komargodski, `The Effective Theory of Long Strings', JHEP 1305 (2013) 118 [arXiv:1302.6257].
[31] S. Dubovsky, R. Flauger, V. Gorbenko, `Flux Tube Spectra from Approximate Integrability at Low Energies', J.Exp.Theor.Phys. 120 (2015) 399 [arXiv:1404.0037].
[32] M. Luscher, P. Weisz, `String excitation energies in SU(N) gauge theories beyond the free-string approximation', JHEP 0407:014 (2004), [arXiv:hep-th/0406205]. itv player
51

[33] J.M. Drummond `Universal subleading spectrum of effective string theory', arXiv:hep-th/0411017.
[34] A. Athenodorou, B. Bringoltz, M. Teper, `Closed flux tubes and their string description in D=3+1 SU(N) gauge theories ', JHEP 02 (2011) 030 [arXiv:1007.4720].
[35] B. Lucini, M. Teper, `Confining strings in SU(N) gauge theories ', Phys.Rev.D64 (2001) 105019 [arXiv:hep-lat/0107007]
[36] A. Hasenfratz and P. Hasenfratz, `The Connection Between the Lambda Parameters of Lattice and Continuum QCD', Phys. Lett. 93B (1980)165.
[37] R. Dashen and D. Gross, `The Relationship Between Lattice and Continuum Definitions of the Gauge Theory Coupling', Phys. Rev. D23 (1981) 2340
[38] J. Ambjorn, P. Olesen, C. Peterson, `Stochastic confinement and dimensional reduction: (I). Four-dimensional SU(2) lattice gauge theory', Nucl. Phys. B240 (1984) 189, 533.
[39] G. P. Lepage, `Redesigning Lattice QCD ', Schladming Winter School lectures 2006 [arXiv:hep-lat/9607076].
[40] G. Parisi, `Recent Progresses in Gauge Theories', 20th International Conference on HighEnergy Physics 1980, AIP Conf.Proc. 68 (1980) 1531.
[41] C. Allton, M. Teper, A. Trivini, `On the running of the bare coupling in SU(N) lattice gauge theories', JHEP 07 (2008) 021 [arXiv:0803.1092].
[42] M. Lu¨scher, R. Sommer, P. Weisz and U. Wolff, `A Precise Determination of the Running Coupling in the SU(3) Yang-Mills Theory', Nucl. Phys. B413 (1994) 48 [hep-lat/9309005].
[43] S. Capitani, M. Lu¨scher, R. Sommer and H. Wittig, `Non-perturbative quark mass renormalization in quenched lattice QCD ', Nucl. Phys. B544 (1999) 669 [hep-lat/9810063].
[44] C. Allton, `Lattice Monte Carlo data versus Perturbation Theory', arXiv:hep-lat/9610016.
[45] R. Sommer, `A new way to set the energy scale in lattice gauge theories and its applications to the static force and s in SU(2) Yang-Mills theory', Nucl. Phys. B411 (1994) 839 [arXiv:hep-lat/9310022].
[46] R. Sommer, `Scale setting in lattice QCD', arXiv:1401.3270.
[47] Ken-Ichi Ishikawa, I Kanamori, Y. Murakami, A. Nakamura, M. Okawa, R. Ueno, `Nonperturbative determination of the -parameter in the pure SU(3) gauge theory from the twisted gradient flow coupling ', JHEP 12 (2017) 067 [arXiv:1702.06289].
[48] N. Husung, M. Koren, P. Krah, R. Sommer, `SU(3) Yang Mills theory at small distances and fine lattices', EPJ Web Conf. 175 (2018) 14024 [arXiv:1711.01860].
52

[49] P. Weisz, `Renormalization and lattice artifacts ', Les Houches Summer School 2009, arXiv:1004.3462.
[50] P. Conkey, S. Dubovsky, M. Teper, `Glueball Spins in D=3 Yang-Mills', JHEP 10 (2019) 175 [arXiv:1909.07430].
[51] P.Di Vecchia, K.Fabricius, G.C.Rossi, G.Veneziano, `Preliminary evidence for UA(1) breaking in QCD from lattice calculations', Nucl. Phys. B192 (1981) 392.
[52] M. Campostrini, A. Di Giacomo and H. Panagopoulos, `The Topological Susceptibility on the Lattice', Phys. Lett. B212 (1988) 206
[53] M. Teper, `Instantons in the Quantized SU(2) Vacuum: A Lattice Monte Carlo Investigation', Phys. Lett. B162 (1985) 357.
[54] D. Smith and M. Teper, `Topological Structure of the SU(3) Vacuum', Phys. Rev. D 58, 014505 (1998) [arXiv:hep-lat/9801008]
[55] M. Lu¨scher, `Properties and uses of the Wilson flow in lattice QCD', JHEP 1008 (2010) 071, [arXiv:1006.4518].
[56] M. Lu¨scher and P. Weisz, `Perturbative analysis of the gradient flow in non-abelian gauge theories', JHEP 1102 (2011) 051 [arXiv:1101.0963].
[57] M. Lu¨scher, `Future applications of the Yang-Mills gradient flow in lattice QCD', PoS LATTICE2013, (2004) 016 [arXiv:1308.5598].
[58] C. Bonati and M. D'Elia, `Comparison of the gradient flow with cooling in SU(3) pure gauge theory', Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 10, 105005 [arXiv:1401.2441].
[59] C. Alexandrou, A. Athenodorou, K. Jansen, `Topological charge using cooling and the gradient flow', Phys. Rev. D92 (12) (2015) 125014 [arXiv:1509.04259].
[60] C. Alexandrou, A. Athenodorou, K. Cichy, A. Dromard, E. Garcia-Ramos, K. Jansen, U. Wenger and F. Zimmermann, `Comparison of topological charge definitions in Lattice QCD', Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) no.5, 424 [arXiv:1708.00696].
[61] G. Cossu, D. Lancaster, B. Lucini, R. Pellegrini, A. Rago, `Ergodic sampling of the topological charge using the density of states ', arXiv:2102.03630.
[62] G. Veneziano, `U(1) Without Instantons', Nucl. Phys. B159 (1979) 213.
[63] E. Witten, `Current Algebra Theorems for the U(1) Goldstone Boson', Nucl. Phys. B156 (1979) 269.
[64] C. Bonanno, C. Bonati, M. D'Elia, `Large-N SU(N) Yang-Mills theories with milder topological freezing', JHEP 03 (2021) 111, [arXiv:2012.14000].
53

[65] M. Hasenbusch, `Fighting topological freezing in the two-dimensional CPN-1 model', Phys.Rev.D96, 054504 (2017) [arXiv:1706.04443].
[66] M. Lu¨scher, F. Palombi, `Universality of the topological susceptibility in the SU(3) gauge theory', JHEP 09 (2010) 110 [arXiv:1008.0732].
[67] C. Bonati, M. D'Elia, P. Rossi, E.Vicari, ` dependence of 4D SU(N) gauge theories in the large-N limit ', Phys. Rev. D 94, 085017 (2016) [arXiv:1607.06360].
[68] K. Ishikawa, G. Schierholz, M. Teper, `Calculation of the Glueball Mass Spectrum of SU(2) and SU(3) Non-Abelian Lattice Gauge Theories I: Introduction and SU(2)' Z.Phys.C 19 (1983) 327.
[69] T. van Ritbergen, J.A.M. Vermaseren, S.A. Larin, `The four-loop beta-function in Quantum Chromodynamics', Phys.Lett. B400 (1997) 379 [arXiv:hep-ph/9701390].
[70] C. Cristou, A. Feo, H. Panagopoulos, E. Vicari, `The three-loop beta function of SU(N) lattice gauge theories with Wilson fermions', Nucl.Phys. B525 (1998) 387; Erratum-ibid. B608 (2001) 479 [arXiv:hep-lat/9801007].
[71] B. Alles, A. Feo, H. Panagopoulos, `Asymptotic scaling corrections in QCD with Wilson fermions from the 3-loop average plaquette', Phys.Lett. B426 (1998) 361; Erratum-ibid. B553 (2003) 337 [arXiv:hep-lat/9801003].
54

 2.2986 2.3714 2.427 2.509 2.60 2.70

l3lt 12316 14316 20316 22320 304 404

SU(2) ;

1 2

ReTr

Up

l



4a

0.6018259(46) 0.36778(69)

0.6226998(36) 0.29023(50)

0.6364293(15) 0.24013(41)

0.6537214(10) 0.18011(22)

0.6700089(5) 0.13283(30)

0.6855713(3) 0.09737(23)

amG 1.224(16) 1.025(12) 0.8469(76) 0.6563(56) 0.5001(41) 0.3652(35)

Table 1: Parameters of the main SU(2) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

 5.6924 5.80 5.8941 5.99 6.0625 6.235 6.3380 6.50

l3lt 10316 12316 14316 184 204 264 304 384



SU(3) ; l

1 3

ReTr

Up

4 a

0.5475112(71) 0.3999(58)

0.5676412(36) 0.31666(66)

0.5810697(18) 0.26118(37)

0.5925636(11) 0.21982(77)

0.6003336(10) 0.19472(54)

0.6167723(6) 0.15003(30)

0.6255952(4) 0.12928(27)

0.6383531(3) 0.10383(24)

amG 0.987(9) 0.908(12) 0.7991(92) 0.7045(65) 0.6365(43) 0.4969(29) 0.4276(37) 0.3474(22)

Table 2: Parameters of the main SU(3) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

55

 10.70 10.85 11.02 11.20 11.40 11.60

l3lt 12316 14320 18320 224 264 304



SU(4) ; l

1 4

ReTr

Up

  4 a

0.5540665(24) 0.3021(5)

0.5664268(15) 0.25426(38)

0.5782610(11) 0.21434(28)

0.5893298(6) 0.18149(49)

0.6004374(4) 0.15305(34)

0.6106057(3) 0.13065(21)

amG 0.8406(48) 0.7611(54) 0.6605(33) 0.5709(34) 0.4864(30) 0.4132(44)

Table 3: Parameters of the main SU(4) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

 16.98 17.22 17.43 17.63 18.04 18.375

l3lt 10316 12316 14320 16320 20324 24330



SU(5) ; l

1 5

ReTr

Up

  3.a1

0.5454873(28) 0.3033(8)

0.5587002(18) 0.2546(6)

0.5685281(10) 0.22217(37)

0.5769707(9) 0.19636(35)

0.5924012(6) 0.15622(38)

0.6036547(4) 0.13106(30)

amG 0.8241(68) 0.7517(51) 0.6751(44) 0.5961(79) 0.4783(44) 0.4078(38)

Table 4: Parameters of the main SU(5) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

 24.67 25.05 25.32 25.55 26.22 26.71

l3lt 10316 12316 14320 16320 20324 24330



SU(6) ; l

1 6

ReTr

Up

  3a.1

0.5409011(28) 0.30658(34)

0.5557062(13) 0.25177(23)

0.5646185(10) 0.22208(35)

0.5715585(9) 0.20153(34)

0.5894540(4) 0.15480(36)

0.6009861(3) 0.12867(27)

amG 0.8240(41) 0.7395(50) 0.6673(32) 0.6112(41) 0.4751(53) 0.3886(37)

Table 5: Parameters of the main SU(6) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

56

 44.10 44.85 45.50 46.10 46.70 47.75

l3lt 8316 10316 12320 14320 16324 20330



SU(8) ; l

1 8

ReTr

Up

  2.6 a

0.5318034(31) 0.32589(62)

0.5497960(15) 0.25791(40)

0.5622253(9) 0.21851(45)

0.5723242(8) 0.18932(38)

0.5815072(5) 0.16557(38)

0.5959878(3) 0.13253(26)

amG 0.8246(66) 0.7461(53) 0.6409(38) 0.5617(43) 0.4909(43) 0.4075(28)

Table 6: Parameters of the main SU(8) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

 69.20 70.38 71.38 72.40 73.35

l3lt 8316 10316 12320 14320 16324



SU(10) ; l

1 10

ReTr

Up

  2.6 a

0.5292925(29) 0.33024(35)

0.5478565(13) 0.25987(30)

0.5602903(9) 0.21988(32)

0.5713707(6) 0.18845(20)

0.5807004(4) 0.16399(19)

amG 0.8282(60) 0.7435(42) 0.6451(44) 0.5549(59) 0.4952(44)

Table 7: Parameters of the main SU(10) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

 99.86 101.55 103.03 104.55 105.95

l3lt 8316 10316 12320 14320 16324



SU(12) ; l

1 12

ReTr

Up

  2.a6

0.5275951(27) 0.33341(40)

0.5464461(12) 0.26162(32)

0.55936304(61) 0.21915(25)

0.57087665(49) 0.18663(38)

0.58043063(32) 0.16197(27)

amG 0.8243(52) 0.7384(51) 0.6432(32) 0.5521(42) 0.4920(37)

Table 8: Parameters of the main SU(12) calculations: the inverse coupling, , the lattice size, the average plaquette, the string tension, , and the mass gap, mG.

57

aEeff (t = 2a) : SU (8) at  = 45.50 on 14320

RP C

all Q

Q = 0 RP C all Q

Q=0

A+1 + 0.6512(21) 0.6497(25) A-1 + 1.199(9) 1.209(9)

1.243(12) 1.236(11)

1.565(21) 1.551(23)

A+2 + 1.668(27) 1.642(25) A-2 + 1.983(48) 2.037(48)

E++ 1.020(4) 1.020(5) E-+

1.230(8) 1.233(8)

1.435(10) 1.424(9)

T1++ 1.670(14) 1.673(18) T1-+ 1.728(20) 1.708(19)

2.011(27) 2.041(35)

2.053(35) 2.037(31)

T2++ 1.032(4) 1.460(9)

1.033(3) T2-+ 1.447(8)

1.670(15) 1.648(18)

1.692(14) 1.691(17)

A+1 - 2.10(7) 2.33(9)

2.10(8) A-1 - 2.41(12)

A+2 - 1.557(18) 1.577(21) A-2 - 1.852(29) 1.754(26)

2.13(6) 2.27(10)

E+- 1.980(35) 1.981(33) E--

2.155(48) 2.119(41)

2.198(54) 2.087(50)

T1+- 1.266(5) 1.271(6) T1-- 1.542(9) 1.557(10)

1.656(13) 1.648(11)

1.859(18) 1.860(19)

T2+- 1.571(11) 1.543(11) T2-- 1.880(19) 1.881(20)

1.900(20) 1.915(27)

1.996(34) 1.994(30)

1.119(8) 1.581(23) 1.908(43)
2.21(8) 2.30(9) 1.354(9) 1.757(24) 2.060(51) 1.841(25) 1.976(27) 1.925(28)
1.360(8) 1.727(15) 1.881(20)
2.10(7) 2.41(12) 2.00(5) 2.15(8)
1.690(18) 2.072(39) 2.198(57) 1.738(18) 1.973(29) 2.088(32)
1.721(15) 1.888(23) 2.043(27)

1.098(9) 1.587(21) 1.937(51)
2.51(11) 2.23(11) 1.356(11) 1.765(25) 2.157(50) 1.861(24) 1.950(26) 1.928(28)
1.356(9) 1.714(17) 1.900(24)
2.10(8) 2.40(13) 2.06(7) 2.25(9)
1.686(21) 1.998(42) 2.204(66) 1.734(18) 1.920(26) 2.001(31)
1.715(21) 1.889(28) 2.006(26)

lk=1 0.5963(11) 0.5932(14) lk=2 1.1204(33) 1.1235(28)

1.2954(33) 1.2918(42)

1.3876(57) 1.3810(64)

Table 9: Comparison of glueball and flux tube energies obtained on fields with topological charge Q = 0 against fields with a `normal' distribution of Q. In SU(8) on a 14320 lattice at  = 45.50. Energies extracted from best (variationally selected) correlators between t = a and t = 2a. Glueballs labelled by representation of cubic rotation symmetry R, parity P and charge conjugation C. Flux tubes are fundamental, lk=1, and k = 2, lk=2.

58

aEG : SU (8) at  = 45.50 on 12320

RP C

all Q

Q = 0 RP C all Q

Q=0

A+1 + 0.6409(38) 0.6440(33) A-1 + 1.066(22) 1.086(22)
1.112(37) 1.096(23)
1.455(15) 1.490(18)
1.653(24) 1.582(26) A+2 + 1.615(25) 1.669(31) A-2 +
1.944(55) 1.979(51) E++ 1.0063(51) 1.0078(61) E-+
0.963(20) 0.938(55)
1.442(11) 1.390(10)
1.579(15) 1.605(27) T1++ 1.517(77) 1.657(79) T1-+
1.676(17) 1.751(21)
1.968(32) 1.993(42)
2.045(29) 2.032(28) T2++ 1.0330(44) 1.0293(50) T2-+
1.454(10) 1.438(10)
1.621(14) 1.639(13)
1.648(12) 1.648(18) A+1 - 2.103(73) 2.076(71) A-1 -
2.27(10) 2.38(12) A+2 - 1.529(18) 1.540(24) A-2 -
1.890(43) 1.805(38)
2.04(8) 2.24(8) E+- 1.921(33) 1.937(38) E--
2.18(5) 2.24(7)
2.15(6) 2.34(8) T1+- 1.281(7) 1.283(7) T1--
1.539(13) 1.530(11)
1.648(14) 1.639(14)
1.829(20) 1.865(20) T2+- 1.549(15) 1.546(12) T2--
1.811(22) 1.818(18)
1.815(20) 1.866(35)
1.899(24) 1.995(36)

1.009(20) 1.493(21) 1.950(47)
2.08(7) 2.27(8) 1.295(41) 1.734(20) 2.067(40)
1.844(23) 1.990(24) 1.960(30)
1.355(9) 1.741(18) 1.887(27)
2.049(67) 2.16(6) 1.94(6) 2.06(7)
1.663(19) 2.023(38) 2.24(7) 1.56(7) 1.988(28) 2.057(27)
1.709(16) 1.896(22) 1.964(29)

1.027(23) 1.525(23) 1.856(52)
2.03(7) 2.36(11) 1.318(44) 1.760(22) 2.136(51)
1.952(31) 1.920(33) 1.962(35)
1.346(9) 1.706(16) 1.942(25)
2.144(65) 2.38(11) 2.08(7) 2.31(10)
1.687(20) 1.932(35) 2.05(5) 1.72(12) 1.992(33) 2.034(40)
1.730(18) 1.894(23) 1.985(27)

lk=1 0.4786(16) 0.4764(9) lk=2 0.8716(62) 0.8769(67)

Table 10: Comparison of glueball and flux tube energies obtained on fields with topological charge Q = 0 against fields with a `normal' distribution of Q. In SU(8) on a 12320 lattice at  = 45.50. Energies extracted from best (variationally selected) correlators. Glueballs labelled by representation of cubic rotation symmetry R, parity P and charge conjugation C. Flux tubes are fundamental, lk=1, and k = 2, lk=2.
59

SU(2) l



a=2.427

12 0.2380(3)

14 0.2387(4)

16 0.2390(8)

20 0.2399(10)

24 0.2396(16)

SU(4) l



a=11.02

18 0.2143(3)

22 0.2142(6)

SU(10) l

a=71.38

12 0.2199(4)

14 0.2195(5)

SU(3) l



a=6.235

18 0.1491(5)

26 0.1499(4)

34 0.1506(6)

SU(4) l



a=11.60

24 0.1301(5)

30 0.1307(3)

SU(12) l



a=103.03

12 0.2198(2)

14 0.2202(7)

SU(6) l

 a=25.35

12 0.2196(5)

14 0.2200(7)

18 0.2181(17)

SU(8) l

 a=45.50

12 0.2187(4)

14 0.2189(4)

Table 11: String tensions obtained using eqn(8), for (fundamental) flux tubes of length l for various groups. A test of finite volume corrections.

SU(4) = 11.02

l

a k=2

18 0.2490(12)

22 0.2480(24)

SU(8) = 45.50

l

a k=2

12 0.2833(9)

14 0.2885(24)

SU(4) = 11.60

l

a k=2

24 0.1523(5)

30 0.1534(5)

SU(10) = 71.38

l

a k=2

12 0.2901(10)

14 0.2946(22)

SU(6) = 25.35

l

a k=2

12 0.2779(9)

14 0.2846(6)

18 0.2841(8)

SU(12) = 103.03

l

a k=2

12 0.2925(11)

14 0.2987(23)

Table 12: String tensions obtained using eqn(8) for k = 2 flux tubes of length l for various groups. Testing finite volume corrections.

60

 2.2986 2.3714 2.427 2.452 2.509 2.60 2.65 2.70 2.75 2.80

lattice 8316 10316 12316 14320 16320 22330 26334 28340 34346 40354

SU(2)

1 2

ReTr

Up

aEf

0.6018323(78) 0.9310(55)

0.6227129(41) 0.7159(41)

0.6364295(26) 0.5831(32)

0.6420346(28) 0.5852(51)

0.6537206(12) 0.4399(15)

0.6700085(8) 0.3370(17)

0.6780431(5) 0.2914(15)

0.6855710(4) 0.2228(13)

0.6926656(2) 0.2048(16)

0.6993804(2) 0.1817(16)

a 0.36590(93) 0.28779(71) 0.23750(56) 0.21791(83) 0.17857(26) 0.13279(29) 0.11342(26) 0.09698(24) 0.08375(21) 0.07242(28)

Table 13: Energies of periodic flux tubes of length l in SU(2) and derived string tensions at the couplings  = 4/g2 on the lattices l3lt.

 5.6924 5.80 5.8941 5.99 6.0625 6.235 6.338 6.50 6.60 6.70

lattice
8316 10316 12316 14320 14320 18326 22330 26338 32340 36344

SU(3)

1 3

ReTr

Up

0.547503(7)

0.567642(5)

0.581069(4)

0.5925655(13)

0.6003331(21)

0.6167715(13)

0.6255948(8)

0.6383532(5)

0.64566194(21)

0.65260033(18)

aEf 1.1588(37) 0.8862(26) 0.7298(47) 0.5984(26) 0.4517(25) 0.3369(26) 0.3182(19) 0.2334(17) 0.2255(15) 0.1933(16)

a 0.4010(23) 0.31603(84) 0.2613(14) 0.21959(76) 0.19509(65) 0.14899(59) 0.12948(44) 0.10319(41) 0.09024(26) 0.07898(28)

Table 14: Energies of periodic flux tubes of length l in SU(3) and derived string tensions at the couplings  = 6/g2 on the lattices l3lt.

61

group S U (4) S U (5) S U (6) S U (8) S U (10) S U (12)

continuum k = 2 string tensions

k/f :NG k/f :l   Casimir scaling

1.381(14) 1.381(14)

1.333

1.551(11) 1.551(11)

1.500

1.654(13) 1.654(13)

1.600

1.731(11) 1.794(28)

1.714

1.733(15) 1.796(29)

1.778

1.792(16) 1.857(29)

1.818

Table 15: Ratio of the k = 2 string tension to the fundamental for various SU(N) gauge theories. Values labelled NG are obtained using eqn(8). Values labelled l   denote our best estimates in that limit. The values corresponding to `Casimir scaling' are shown for comparison.

group S U (6) S U (8) S U (10)) S U (12)

k=3/f 1.919(15) 2.232(21) 2.381(25) 2.484(31)

k = 3, 4 string tensions

Casimir scaling k=4/f 1.800

2.143

2.418(31)

2.333

2.806(43)

2.455

3.070(60)

Casimir scaling
2.286 2.667 2.909

Table 16: Ratios of the k = 3 and k = 4 string tensions to the fundamental for various SU(N) gauge theories. Values are obtained using eqn(8). Values labelled l   denote our best estimates in that limit. The values corresponding to `Casimir scaling' are shown for comparison.

N

a 

/3Iloop 2/ndf /2Iloop

3MloSop/

2 [0.133,0.072] 4.535(16) 0.42 4.914(16) 0.5806(21)[570]

3 [0.195,0.079] 4.855(11) 1.40 5.210(20) 0.5424(13)[185]

4 [0.254,0.131] 5.043(10) 0.48 5.532(11) 0.5222(11)[230]

5 [0.255,0.131] 5.090(14) 0.31 5.622(15) 0.5174(15)[245]

6 [0.252,0.129] 5.105(11) 1.62 5.664(48) 0.5158(11)[250]

8 [0.258,0.133] 5.148(17) 0.13 5.727(20) 0.5115(17)[250]

10 [0.260,0.164] 5.221(40) 3.30 5.845(44) 0.5044(20)[270]

12 [0.262,0.162] 5.193(13) 0.45 5.823(15) 0.5071(13)[270]

Table 17: Results for I in units of the string tension using the exact 3-loop -function,
with the 2-loop result for comparison. Poor fits denoted by . Resulting MS is shown with statistical errors and an estimate of the (correlated) systematic error in square brackets.

62

N

c0



c

a 



2/ndf ndf

2 4.510(15) 4.98(25) [0.133,0.072] [2.60,2.80] 0.40 3

3 4.827(12) 2.48(11) [0.195,0.079] [5.99,6.70] 1.29 4

4 5.017(8) 1.622(40) [0.302,0.131] [10.70,11.60] 0.98 4

5 5.068(11) 1.435(56) [0.303,0.131] [16.98,18.375] 0.38 4

6 5.064(12) 1.541(68) [0.252,0.129] [25.05,26.71] 1.45 3

8 5.143(9) 1.265(34) [0.326,0.133] [44.10,47.75] 1.75 4

10 5.176(10) 1.285(35) [0.260,0.164] [70.38,73.35] 3.06 2

12 5.148(12) 1.387(43) [0.262,0.162] [101.55,105.95] 0.41 2

Table 18: Fitted values of the coefficients c0 and c that determine the interpolationfunction in eqn(25) for each of our SU(N) lattice gauge theories. In each case the range in a  and of  of the fit is shown as is the 2 per degree of freedom and the number of degrees of freedom.

63

aEeff (t = 2a) : SU (2) at  = 2.427

RP

12316

14316

20316

A+1 0.840(11) 0.854(8) 1.225(26)

0.847(8)

1.418(17) 1.367(15) 1.408(19)

1.593(27)

1.611(36) 1.721(51) 1.780(45)

1.871(40) 1.839(46) 1.872(46)

A+2 1.680(40) 1.805(38) 1.942(72) E+ 1.220(9) 1.254(14) 1.284(13)

1.317(17)

1.549(20)

1.632(30) 1.672(33) 1.672(40)

1.774(31) 1.820(39) 1.832(42)

T1+ 1.925(42) 1.875(27) 1.855(37) 1.977(48) 1.972(34) 1.916(50)

T2+ 1.297(12) 1.278(14) 1.289(11) 1.739(20) 1.701(30) 1.672(21)

1.774(34) 1.849(22) 1.877(30)

A-1 1.471(30) 1.540(30) 1.526(36) 1.71(4) 1.87(9) 1.94(9)

A-2 2.31(16) 2.21(17) 2.04(12) E- 1.585(31) 1.680(28) 1.652(34)

2.00(6) 2.04(7) 2.02(7)

T1- 2.18(6)

2.15(6)

2.09(7)

T2- 1.665(25) 1.632(33) 1.620(21)

2.04(5) 2.00(4) 2.01(6)

lk=1 0.5804(38) 0.7140(41) 1.0996(39) 1.367(23) 1.428(32) 1.677(9)

Table 19: Comparison of glueball effective energies from t = 2a and flux tube energies (l1) obtained on 12316, 14316 and 20316 lattices at  = 2.427 in SU(2). Unmatched states are ditorelons. Glueballs labelled by representation of cubic rotation symmetry R and parity P . Fundamental flux tube energies , lk=1, are ground and first excited states.

64

aEeff (t = 2a) : SU (5) at  = 17.46

RP C

14320

18318

RP C

14320

18318

A+1 + 0.655(5) 0.658(8) A-1 + 1.135(13) 1.125(13)

1.162(14)

1.547(29) 1.552(36)

1.253(21) 1.227(18)

2.053(73) 2.035(36)

1.557(23) 1.597(27)

1.629(38) 1.649(27)

A+2 + 1.644(41) 1.591(36) A-2 + 2.08(11) 2.23(13)

2.03(7) 1.99(9)

2.50(20) 2.35(18)

E++ 1.034(6) 1.028(7) E-+ 1.390(13) 1.366(17)

1.211(15)

1.755(22) 1.782(32)

1.425(17) 1.477(16)

2.32(10) 2.04(8)

1.588(32) 1.590(21)

1.605(21) 1.645(34)

T1++ 1.655(28) 1.674(32) T1-+ 1.855(30) 1.831(24)

1.717(24) 1.718(25)

1.890(40) 1.862(29)

1.998(31) 2.026(50)

1.955(37 1.999(46)

T2++ 1.037(5) 1.047(5) T2-+ 1.357(15) 1.350(13)

1.454(11) 1.448(12)

1.732(22) 1.774(25)

1.656(18) 1.661(22)

1.841(37) 1.892(47)

1.679(19) 1.667(23)

2.03(5) 2.04(6)

A+1 - 2.26(13) 2.24(11)

2.14(10) A-1 - 2.12(9) 2.06(9)

2.35(15)

2.20(13) 2.35(17)

A+2 - 1.600(30) 1.581(27) A-2 - 1.94(10) 1.91(6)

1.894(49) 1.986(53)

2.18(11) 2.29(14)

2.12(10) 2.06(9)

E+- 1.99(7)

1.97(6) E-- 1.745(22) 1.718(31)

2.10(8) 2.11(8)

1.969(53) 1.979(55)

T1+- 1.277(9) 1.267(7) T1-- 1.747(30) 1.760(25)

1.533(17) 1.558(19)

2.051(47) 1.939(33)

1.652(20) 1.679(21)

2.003(47) 1.931(45)

1.764(26) 1.876(34)

1.900(41) 1.953(36)

T2+- 1.577(20) 1.590(22) T2-- 1.734(29) 1.741(21)

1.815(31) 1.860(35)

1.879(32) 1.865(36)

1.902(27) 1.868(26)

1.999(44) 1.979(41)

1.919(36) 2.037(31)

lk=1 0.5899(26) 0.7936(64) lk=2 0.9468(94) 1.274(18)

1.258(21) 1.318(37)

1.266(30) 1.66(10)

Table 20: Comparison of glueball effective energies from t = 2a and flux tube energies (l1,l2) obtained on 14320 and 18318 lattices at  = 17.46 in SU(5). Unmatched states are ditorelons. Glueballs labelled by representation of cubic rotation symmetry R, parity P and charge conjugation C. Flux tube energies are fundamental, lk=1, and k = 2, lk=2.
65

aEeff (t = 2a) : SU (12) at  = 103.03

RP C

12320

14320

RP C 12320

14320

A+1 + 0.6434(32) 0.6499(50) A-1 + 1.079(8) 1.097(12)

1.190(9) 1.200(14)

1.567(22) 1.591(33)

1.495(19) 1.579(25)

1.859(38) 2.037(91)

1.604(26)
1.660(26) A+2 + 1.629(30)
1.91(5) E++ 1.021(5)

1.585(33) 1.687(43) 1.639(39) 2.11(10) 1.026(7)

A-2 + 2.14(10) 2.21(11) 2.20(9) 2.30(13)
E-+ 1.346(10) 1.355(15)

1.429(14) 1.464(16)

1.723(21) 1.747(32)

1.610(19) 1.632(28)

2.105(33) 2.178(74)

T1++ 1.635(17) 1.692(21) T1-+ 1.865(21) 1.885(39)

1.712(19) 1.776(26)

1.945(30) 1.930(36)

2.090(32) 2.062(47)

2.012(28) 2.026(49)

T2++ 1.040(4) 1.031(7) T2-+ 1.357(8) 1.366(12)

1.465(9) 1.473(16)

1.730(16) 1.748(23)

1.597(14) 1.659(21)

1.891(26) 1.905(44)

1.652(14) 1.676(25)

1.932(29) 1.975(40)

A+1 - 2.001(52) 2.06(11) A-1 - 2.18(8) 2.09(11)

2.12(8) 2.23(13)

2.23(10) 2.30(12)

A+2 - 1.564(22) 1.603(30) A-2 - 1.932(52) 2.026(70)

1.823(36) 1.882(53)

2.209(85) 2.33(17)

1.97(8) 2.19(10) E+- 1.903(29) 2.011(43) E-- 1.682(17) 1.677(30)

2.140(51) 2.044(70)

2.053(44) 2.087(54)

2.11(5) 2.26(9)

T1+- 1.269(6) 1.268(8) T1-- 1.696(18) 1.693(22)

1.543(12) 1.546(16)

1.921(25) 1.897(44)

1.678(16) 1.690(18)

1.976(33) 2.023(45)

1.850(21) 1.880(27)

2.21(6) 2.18(6)

T2+- 1.534(13) 1.541(15) T2-- 1.719(20) 1.766(27)

1.878(24) 1.870(27)

1.893(29) 1.935(31)

1.850(22) 1.896(36) 1.988(32) 1.987(43)

2.014(32) 2.035(37) 2.19(5) 2.19(6)

lk=1 0.4812(13) 0.5993(40) lk=2 0.935(8) 1.172(18)

Table 21: Comparison of glueball effective energies from t = 2a and flux tube energies (l1,l2) obtained on 12320 and 14320 lattices at  = 103.03 in SU(12). Glueballs labelled by representation of cubic rotation symmetry R, parity P and charge conjugation C. Flux tube energies are fundamental, lk=1, and k = 2, lk=2.

66

aEeff (t = 2a) : SU (12) at  = 103.03

RP C

12320

14320

bl = 1 - 4

bl = 1 - 5 bl = 1 - 4 bl = 1 - 5

A+1 +

0.6434(32)

0.6432(32) 0.6499(50) 0.6497(50)

1.172(10)

1.190(9)

1.179(14) 1.200(14) 1.200(14)

1.424(23)

1.462(20)

1.495(19) 1.588(23) 1.433(29)

1.604(26)

1.601(29) 1.585(33) 1.571(35)

1.660(26)

1.666(30) 1.687(43) 1.659(40)

1.753(25)

1.780(31) 1.786(54) 1.780(52)

E ++

1.021(5)

1.019(5) 1.026(7) 1.026(7)

1.525(13)[1.01(14)] 1.118(7)

1.273(20)

1.429(14)

1,373(12) 1.464(16) 1.446(16)

1.610(19)

1.610(18) 1.635(29) 1.632(28)

1.657(19)

1.650(18) 1.663(24) 1.666(25)

Table 22: Comparison of A+1 + and E++ glueball effective energies from t = 2a obtained on 12320 and 14320 lattices at  = 103.03 in SU(12). Using operators up to blocking levels 4 and 5 respectively, as shown.

number of operators: N  [4, 12]

R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1

12

A2

7

E

36

7

6

8

5

7

7

24

24

30

T1

48

54

66

51

T2

60

60

60

54

number of operators: N = 2, 3

R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1

27

A2

14

E

80

9

8

11

6

13

11

30

40

44

T1

78

84(75)

132

81

T2

108

96(87)

108

84

Table 23: Number of operators in rotational representation , R, with parity, P , and charge conjugation, C, as used in our various SU(N) calculations, at each blocking level. Some numbers for SU(2) differ from SU(3) and are in brackets; also no C = - for SU(2)

67

loop {2,3,-2,-3} {1,2,2,-1,-2,-2} {1,2,3,-1,-2,-3} {1,3,2,-3,-1,-2} {1,2,2,-1,3,-2,-3,-2} {1,3,-1,-3,-1,-2,1,2} {1,2,3,-1,-3,-3,-2,3} {1,3,1,2,-3,-1,-1,-2} {1,2,2,2,-1,3,-2,-3,-2,-2} {1,2,2,2,-1,-2,3,-2,-3,-2} {-3,1,3,1,2,-3,-1,3,-1,-2} {-3,1,3,1,2,3,-1,-3,-2,-1}

operator loops RP C
A+1 +, E++ T1+-
A+1 +, A+2 +, E++ T1+-, T2+- A+1 +, T2++ A+2 -, T1+-
A+1 +, E++, T2++, T1-+, T2-+ T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, E--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, A-2 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, A-2 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, A-2 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, T1-+, T2-+ T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, A-2 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2-- A+1 +, A+2 +, E++, T1++, T2++, A-1 +, A-2 +, E-+, T1-+, T2-+ A+1 -, A+2 -, E+-, T1+-, T2+-, A-1 -, A-2 -, E--, T1--, T2--

Table 24: The 12 loops used as the basis of our glueball calculations for N  4. These generate contributions to the representations as shown.

68

SU (2) : aMG

RP  = 2.2986  = 2.3714  = 2.427  = 2.509

12316

14316

20316

22320

 = 2.60 304

 = 2.70 404

A+1 1.224(16) 1.025(12) 0.8469(76) 0.6563(56) 0.5001(41) 0.3652(35) 1.616(28 1.407(19) 1.0774(82) 0.7968(62) 0.5950(43)

2.08(8)

1.78(5) 1.372(15) 0.997(12) 0.717(13)

A+2

2.34(16) 1.942(72) 1.439(23) 0.980(37) 0.770(16)

2.14(12) 1.511(26) 1.142(67) 0.836(15)

E+ 2.004(51) 1.530(23) 1.284(13) 0.967(7) 0.6984(64) 0.5226(29)

2.07(14) 1.672(39) 1.268(14) 0.9338(47) 0.6674(89)

1.934(50) 1.366(15) 1.033(7) 0.741(12)

T1+

2.28(7) 1.856(37) 1.448(13) 1.047(17) 0.794(11)

1.916(50) 1.521(18) 1.092(20) 0.824(11)

T2+ 1.973(33) 1.534(24) 1.289(11) 0.955(5) 0.7110(52) 0.5228(21) 2.10() 1.672(21) 1.291(11) 0.946(15) 0.7015(43)

1.87(3) 1.460(12) 1.051(26) 0.790(10)

A-1 2.41(12) 1.907(53) 1.526(36) 1.103(12) 0.8051(80) 0.6047(56) 1.94(9) 1.482(20) 1.079(19) 0.779(14)

A-2

2.53(33) 2.104(12) 1.769(42) 1.236(10) 0.955(27)

2.02(6) 1.47(4) 1.083(13)

E-

2.024(50) 1.652(33) 1.252(12) 0.934(8) 0.683(8)

2.02(7) 1.534(17) 1.146(11) 0.832(7)

T1-

2.39(11) 2.09(7) 1.615(18) 1.194(11) 0.874(14)

1.647(23) 1.223(12) 0.910(12)

T2-

2.000(45) 1.620(21) 1.247(9) 0.911(19) 0.6798(61)

2.01(5) 1.527(14) 1.138(10) 0.8117(86)

aEf 1.5334(61) 1.1019(41) 1.0996(39) 0.6644(17) 0.4932(24) 0.3521(18)

Table 25: SU(2) lattice glueball masses for all RP representations, and the flux tube energy aEf .

69

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++
T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+
T2-+ aEf aEk=2

 = 10.70 12316
0.8406(48) 1.499(21) 2.06(6) 2.21(7) 2.23(9) 2.56(15) 1.449(13) 1.938(34) 2.174(62) 2.30(5)
1.400(45) 2.014(29) 2.145(53) 2.259(47) 1.560(23) 2.124(61) 2.64(21)
1.867(26) 2.35(8) 2.610(74) 2.51(10) 2.77(12) 1.874(25) 2.47(7) 1.0042(31) 1.405(35)

SU (4) : aMG, C = +

 = 10.85  = 11.02  = 11.20

14320

18320

224

0.7611(54) 1.347(10) 1.806(36) 1.927(54)

0.6605(33) 1.173(28) 1.554(17) 1.629(21)

0.5709(34) 0.999(17) 1.316(12) 1.371(15)

1.884(30) 1.611(18) 1.298(54) 2.13(8) 1.830(35) 1.394(68)

1.202(7) 1.693(16) 1.829(22)

1.023(4) 0.8647(35) 1.416(11) 1.219(9) 1.548(16) 1.357(36)

1.918(23) 1.927(27)

1.630(16) 1.614(73) 1.954(29)

1.345(34) 1.319(28) 1.550(44)

1.220(6) 1.676(20) 1.809(20) 1.876(20)

1.030(6) 1.436(10) 1.45(6) 1.620(21)

0.8623(59) 1.191(17) 1.353(31) 1.375(30)

1.306(15) 1.062(21) 0.926(14) 1.91(5) 1.541(26) 1.319(14)

2.28(10)

2.09(7) 2.25(9)

1.725(34) 2.02(6)

1.587(15) 1.338(10) 1.110(16) 2.028(36) 1.701(19) 1.432(10)

2.176(38) 2.208(52) 2.132(51)

1.825(22) 1.860(25) 1.92(4)

1.571(10) 1.580(13) 1.36(7)

1.572(10) 1.342(21) 1.103(14) 2.062(39) 1.673(12) 1.370(31)

0.8269(27) 0.7666(21) 0.6754(39) 1.160(6) 1.056(11) 0.9540(36)

 = 11.40 264
0.4864(30) 0.872(12) 1.159(9) 1.175(33) 1.134(23) 1.374(49) 0.7232(53) 1.021(4) 1.103(19) 1.150(15) 1.171(17) 1.383(31) 0.7338(52) 1.024(10) 1.117(15) 1.129(14) 0.7715(74) 1.078(19) 1.444(13) 1.681(25) 0.9310(86) 1.220(21) 1.277(23) 1.281(26) 1.303(26) 0.9569(68) 1.241(21)
0.5673(57) 0.784(14)

 = 11.60 304
0.4132(44) 0.7324(85) 0.982(14) 0.966(13) 0.953(14) 1.091(24) 0.6146(38) 0.860(8) 0.947(9) 0.955(20) 0.981(10) 1.215(19) 0.6211(35) 0.8727(56) 0.959(9) 0.979(8) 0.6612(57) 0.973(14) 1.275(34) 1.321(45) 0.8077(66) 1.022(36) 1.098(13) 1.070(39) 1.145(18) 0.8090(36) 1.057(9)
0.4759(16) 0.6675(75)

Table 26: SU(4) lattice glueball masses for all RP and C = + representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies.

70

SU (4) : aMG, C = - RP C  = 10.70  = 10.85  = 11.02  = 11.20  = 11.40  = 11.60

12316

14320

18320

224

264

304

A+1 -

2.37(9) 2.14(7) 1.738(28) 1.457(16) 1.175(26)

2.20(9) 1.807(32) 1.535(15) 1.338(9)

A+2 - 2.27(8) 1.767(30) 1.547(16) 1.254(38) 1.050(21) 0.909(28) 2.47(17) 2.20(6) 1.876(36) 1.576(21) 1.335(14) 1.099(23)

E +-

2.24(7) 1.94(4) 1.611(15) 1.323(32) 1.152(20)

2.44(11) 2.08(4) 1.737(22) 1.457(12) 1.210(23)

T1+- 1.743(16) 1.502(10) 1.286(6) 1.085(5) 0.9028(60) 0.7777(49) 2.134(38) 1.806(21) 1.534(12) 1.296(7) 1.089(11) 0.895(17)

2.292(46) 1.928(26) 1.618(11) 1.353(28) 1.166(11) 0.976(9) T2+- 2.122(49) 1.796(20) 1.392(56) 1.244(26) 1.081(14) 0.9176(71)
2.42(8) 2.050(33) 1.790(18) 1.50(4) 1.262(19) 1.107(13)

2.41(8) 2.135(45) 1.807(15) 1.584(12) 1.326(6) 1.120(15)

A-1 -

2.41(17) 2.055(63) 1.758(25) 1.526(18) 1.294(33)

2.53(15) 2.214(62) 1.797(61) 1.535(16) 1.321(51)

A-2 -

2.23(10) 1.85(5) 1.617(22) 1.355(11) 1.155(9)

2.43(19) 2.15(8) 1.876(36) 1.609(19) 1.372(63)

E-- 2.287(70) 1.970(31) 1.681(23) 1.369(36) 1.189(20) 1.016(13)

2.16(6) 1.96(4) 1.706(15) 1.464(9) 1.229(7)

T1-- 2.269(53) 2.004(26) 1.680(14) 1,454(37) 2.51(11) 2.152(34) 1.946(23) 1.618(13)
T2-- 2.38(8) 2.032(32) 1.719(16) 1.395(41) 2.141(42) 1.64(15) 1.446(47)

1.164(15) 1.309(28) 1.203(18) 1.306(21)

1.006(8) 1.140(13) 1.022(10) 1.097(13)

Table 27: SU(4) lattice glueball masses for all RP and C = - representations.

71

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++ T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+ T2-+ A+1 - A+2 - E +- T1+-
T2+-
A-1 - A-2 - E -- T1-- T2-- aEf aEk=2

 = 16.98 10316
0.8241(68) 1.508(20) 1.969(44) 2.24(8) 1.437(10) 1.979(28) 2.16(6) 2.220(53)
1.427(11) 2.009(27) 2.165(43)
1.520(20) 2.09(10) 2.84(28) 1.828(26) 2.17(9) 2.60(11)
1.851(27) 2.34(8)
2.15(7)
1.796(17) 2.160(33)
2.151(44)
2.350(75) 2.250(82) 2.223(52)
0.8082(44) 1.293(19)

 = 17.22 12316
0.7517(51) 1.380(97) 1.780(34) 1.852(60) 1.1967(82) 1.707(14) 1.802(27) 1.857(28) 1.958(33) 1.2123(47) 1.724(19) 1.860(28) 1.879(27) 1.286(12) 1.897(57) 2.05(11) 1.576(20) 1.987(60) 2.189(46) 2.183(61) 1.561(15) 2.056(40) 2.43(14) 1.833(33) 2.19(8) 1.486(11) 1.66(9) 1.949(13) 1.767(19) 2.145(45) 2.135(66)
2.224(77) 1.988(32) 1.944(31) 2.011(31) 2.239(48)
0.6850(34) 1.104(10)

SU (5) : aMG

 = 17.43  = 17.63

14320

16320

0.6751(44) 0.5961(79) 1.170(9) 1.075(8) 1.632(30) 1.413(12)

1.668(28) 1.523(84)

1.0384(55) 0.9250(37) 1.472(13) 1.310(9) 1.619(15) 1.403(57)

1.674(19) 1.676(18) 1.0551(44) 1.4722(72) 1.524(55) 1.682(18) 1.085(17) 1.582(23)

1.445(45) 1.479(52) 0.9264(78) 1.278(24) 1.433(42) 1.376(45) 0.961(18) 1.391(16)

2.15(8) 1.942(48)

1.335(28) 1.214(29) 1.61(13) 1.485(56)

1.869(34) 1.665(83) 1.928(26) 1.715(22)

1.321(28) 1.167(17) 1.749(20) 1.461(44)

2.245(63) 1.870(38)

1.589(20) 1.421(15)

1.932(42) 1.3059(83) 1.489(51) 1.691(15)

1.746(18) 1.150(15) 1.412(33) 1.4930(95)

1.576(15) 1.847(20) 1.888(24)

1.353(33) 1.482(56) 1.693(15)

2.130(82) 1.892(38)

1.996(50) 1.67(16) 1.727(14) 1.534(11)

1.745(22) 1.493(52)

1.746(21) 1.474(55) 1.919(22) 1.704(16)

0.6117(23) 0.5476(22) 0.9927(81) 0.8868(52)

 = 18.04 20324
0.4783(44) 0.850(12) 1.119(25) 1.116(32) 0.7383(27) 1.019(13) 1.124(19) 1,138(18) 1.151(20) 0.7294(44) 1.032(11) 1.122(14) 1.168(18) 0.7551(76) 1.137(11) 1.512(16) 0.9593(95) 1.257(28) 1.315(24) 1.317(28) 0.9598(80) 1.264(20) 1.468(13) 1.125(8) 1.317(31) 0.9336(86) 1.092(11) 1.1933(53) 1.101(14) 1.292(26) 1.319(24) 1.527(15) 1.355(46) 1.217(8) 1.158(19) 1.230(15) 1.345(6)
0.4326(24) 0.7018(47)

 = 18.375 24330
0.4078(38) 0.7235(71) 0.956(14) 0.962(14) 0.6118(33) 0.8599(82) 0.952(12) 0.969(7) 0.988(9) 0.6158(45) 0.8720(60) 0.967(10) 0.985(9) 0.6416(41) 0.964(14) 1.284(10) 0.8024(73) 1.036(42) 1.093(13) 1.129(13) 0.8161(51) 1.039(11) 1.222(27) 0.9582(50) 1.129(17) 0.7731(53) 0.9240(67) 0.9949(95) 0.9229(77) 1.095(14) 1.103(15) 1.319(10) 1.076(21) 1.044(4) 1.022(22) 1.034(11) 1.122(9)
0.3660(19) 0.5907(25)

Table 28: SU(5) lattice glueball masses for all RP C representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies. 72

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++ T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+ T2-+ A+1 - A+2 - E +- T1+-
T2+-
A-1 - A-2 - E -- T1-- T2-- aEf aEk=2

 = 24.67 10316
0.8240(41) 1.539(17) 1.987(53) 2.23(9) 1.453(18) 1.981(40) 2.12(6) 2.30(7) 2.25(7) 1.438(11) 1.942(23) 2.21(5)
1.479(21) 1.965(39) 2.48(21) 1.875(29) 2.59(9) 2.37(8) 2.84(11) 1.895(29) 2.30(6)
2.16(10) 2.54(12) 1.801(22) 2.18(5) 2.16(4) 2.108(35) 2.51(9) 2.55(8)
2.247(51) 2.276(44) 2.310(73)
0.8240(41) 1.440(9)

 = 25.05 12316
0.7395(50) 1.326(17) 1.707(32) 1.795(43) 1.1690(51) 1.755(22) 1.814(29) 1.893(26) 1.862(29) 1.1926(52) 1.691(20) 1.809(22) 1.877(22) 1.233(14) 1.802(49) 2.49(14) 1.525(16) 2.029(41) 2.143(41) 2.190(48) 1.544(13) 2.016(33) 2.34(13) 1.806(49) 2.070(66) 1.485(12) 1.767(23) 1.917(26) 1.802(21) 2.109(42) 2.079(41) 2.41(18) 2.10(8) 1.925(37) 1.930(38) 1.972(38) 2.202(42)
0.7395(50) 1.150(12)

SU (6) : aMG

 = 25.32  = 25.55

14320

16320

0.6673(32) 0.6112(41) 1.209(9) 1.134(12) 1.545(20) 1.31(6)

1.625(25) 1.383(66)

1.0348(53) 0.9427(44) 1.458(11) 1.294(35) 1.598(16) 1.410(56)

1.699(19) 1.676(91) 1.0566(92) 1.447(36) 1.566(66) 1.697(13) 1.0942(84) 1.615(23)

1.545(65) 1.507(68) 0.9516(86) 1.301(32) 1.445(47) 1.530(9) 0.970(21) 1.436(16)

2.050(74) 2.017(59)

1.372(10) 1.192(28) 1.776(25) 1.479(64)

1.934(25) 1.740(15) 1.968(29) 1.780(19)

1.373(9) 1.243(6) 1.744(18) 1.527(60)

2.077(72) 1.902(43)

1.582(23) 1.443(15)

1.985(35) 1.301(8) 1.562(11) 1.690(15)

1.742(23) 1.156(21) 1.433(9) 1.533(10)

1.581(13) 1.903(28) 1.873(25)

1.364(38) 1.65(10) 1.729(15)

2.090(73) 1.938(50)

1.909(45) 1.774(39) 1.719(19) 1.539(14)

1.56(9) 1.431(47)

1.643(82) 1.519(57) 1.900(27) 1.731(17)

0.6673(32) 0.6112(41) 1.076(10) 1.0119(70)

 = 26.22 20324
0.4751(53) 0.887(12) 1.122(20) 1.129(29) 0.7251(55) 1.015(12) 1.103(18) 1.137(13) 1.150(18) 0.7157(45) 1.034(11) 1.109(14) 1.152(15) 0.7549(81) 1.101(24) 1.472(20) 0.944(11) 1.208(36) 1.319(6) 1.362(8) 0.940(9) 1.211(17) 1.458(13) 1.102(9) 1.350(9) 0.9072(72) 1.086(16) 1.172(15) 1.089(12) 1.264(26) 1.333(7) 1.519(18) 1.361(12) 1.208(8) 1.147(15) 1.166(15) 1.323(5)
0.4751(53) 0.7328(26)

 = 26.71 24330
0.3886(370 0.7575(92) 0.947(14) 0.958(14) 0.6066(34) 0.844(15) 0.881(20) 0.9663(83) 0.9720(93) 0.6003(37) 0.8478(68) 0.9265(75) 0.926(8) 0.6391(48) 0.924(11) 1.214(26) 0.7841(60) 1.042(15) 1.086(11) 1.133(18) 0.7972(63) 1.014(32) 1.184(30) 0.929(13) 1.118(15) o.7542(50) 0.9074(94) 0.974(8) 0.908(8) 1.048(27) 1.128(5) 1.306(10) 1.081(18) 1.0294(40) 0.995(37) 1.028(24) 1.111(13)
0.3886(37) 0.6160(25)

Table 29: SU(6) lattice glueball masses for all RP C representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies. 73

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++ T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+
c T2-+ A+1 - A+2 - E +- T1+-
T2+-
A-1 - A-2 - E -- T1-- T2-- aEf aEk=2

 = 44.10 8316
0.8246(66) 1.615(26) 2.01(6) 2.42(11) 1.504(13) 2.145(41)
2.50(8)
1.536(12) 2.092(41) 2.41(8)
1.618(33) 2.21(10)
1.994(56) 2.72(14)
1.959(26) 2.62(11)
2.25(10)
1.898(26) 2.23(6)
2.33(6) 2.53(12) 2.53(10)
2.42(9) 2.55(9) 2.48(7)
0.7067(33) 1.268(20)

 = 44.85 10316
0.7461(53) 1.191(50) 1.764(39) 1.828(46) 1.184(8) 1.689(18) 1.855(28) 1.970(29) 1.932(29) 1.191(22) 1.689(15) 1.875(28) 1.889(30) 1.256(13) 1.75(5) 2.27(13) 1.573(17) 2.019(54) 2.29(15)
1.47(5) 2.043(43) 2.47(16) 1.834(37) 2.196(52) 1.510(12) 1.812(27) 1.914(21) 1.781(21) 2.237(46) 2.265(50) 2.62(18) 2.22(10) 2.012(40) 1.906(30) 1.981(32) 2.24(5)
0.5506(21) 0.9948(85)

SU (8) : aMG

 = 45.50  = 46.10

12320

14320

0.6409(38) 0.5617(43) 1.112(37) 1.081(22) 1.42(9) 1.252(41)

1.615(25) 1.408(26)

1.0063(51) 0.8813(48) 1.442(11) 1.299(34) 1.579(15) 1.393(13)

1.517(27) 1.536(90) 1.033(10) 1.428(39) 1.621(76) 1.52(8) 1.009(20) 1.42(8)

1.397(40) 1,392(43) 0.8795(58) 1.188(21) 1.357(34) 1.344(35) 0.902(17) 1.23(5)

2.07(6) 1.857(38)

1.295(41) 1.131(21) 1.734(20) 1.498(14)

1.844(23) 1.571(65)

1.990(24) 1.639(12)

1.271(24) 1.146(16) 1.741(18) 1.506(11)

2.103(73) 1.831(40)

1.529(18) 1.275(44)

1.921(33) 1.659(26)

1.281(7) 1.539(13) 1.648(14)

1.102(6) 1.328(6) 1.437(10)

1.544(15) 1.811(22) 1.815(20)

1.294(30) 1.50(6) 1,618(18)

2.05(7) 1.888(35)

1.94(6) 1.663(19) 1.564(69)

1.74(17) 1.441(11) 1.414(42)

1.709(16) 1.473(10) 1.896(22) 1.601(13)

0.4778(24) 0.4204(20) 0.8716(61) 0.7923(69)

 = 46.70 16324
0.4909(43) 0.930(13) 1.146(27) 1.180(27) 0.7676(67) 1.070(16) 1.184(22) 1.204(21) 1.238(29) 0.7725(64) 1.101(12) 1.162(14) 1.201(18) 0.8021(95) 1.074(82) 1.588(32) 1.013(11) 1.320(9) 1.324(32) 1.447(39) 0.982(10) 1.298(25) 1.552(19) 1.176(26) 1.463(38) 0.9556(82) 1.1724(41) 1.221(16) 1.133(14) 1.327(32) 1.343(33) 1.633(23) 1.368(67) 1.250(31) 1.186(22) 1.2920(56) 1.4108(81)
0.3674(20) 0.6735(46)

 = 47.75 20330
0.4705(28) 0.755(10) 0.936(18) 0.969(16) 0.6192(69) 0.831(8) 0.954(11) 0.982(7) 0.996(10) 0.6195(22) 0.870(16) 0.963(8) 0.975(24) 0.6365(81) 0.963(35) 1.257(33) 0.8082(65) 1.101(15) 1.108(11) 1.142(18) 0.807(10) 1.065(11) 1.209(32) 0.928(13) 1.117(18) 0.7706(46) 0.9269(78) 0.980(8) 0.922(7) 1.093(15) 1.119(13) 1.254(36) 1.114(24) 1.009(14) 0.974(29) 1.037(9) 1.109(14)
0.2943(14) 0.5483(29)

Table 30: SU(8) lattice glueball masses for all RP C representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies. 74

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++ T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+ T2-+ A+1 - A+2 - E +- T1+-
T2+-
A-1 - A-2 - E -- T1-- T2-- aEf aEk=2

 = 69.20 8316
0.8282(60) 1.41(8) 2.13(8) 2.39(14) 1.535(16) 2.14(5) 2.25(8) 2.52(11)
1.560(10) 2.179(52)
1.598(30) 2.23(10)
1.976(48) 2.43(12) 2.63(12)
2.000(28) 2.53(11)
2.39(11)
1.908(25) 2.28(5)
2.27(6)
2.34(10) 2.56(11)
0.7299(19) 1.401(6)

SU (10) : aMG

 = 70.38  = 71.38

10316

12320

0.7435(42) 0.6451(44) 1.364(62) 1.118(29) 1.710(31) 1.495(22)

1.987(45) 1.635(22)

1.212(9) 1.677(17) 1.901(25)

1.013(5) 1.464(62) 1.502(62)

1.941(32) 1.895(37) 1.212(8) 1.720(18) 1.868(27) 1.925(34) 1.259(13) 1.806(14)

1.647(16) 1.681(20) 1.047(12) 1.435(9) 1.574(24) 1.584(56) 1.078(9) 1.527(21)

2.45(20) 2.22(8)

1.576(22) 1.292(29) 2.051(40) 1.735(21)

2.174(42) 1.949(71) 1.958(45)

1.556(16) 1.338(29) 2.075(36) 1.693(14)

2.56(17) 2.02(7)

1.858(38) 1.578(25)

2.20(7) 1.514(12) 1.848(22) 1.923(25)

1.924(31) 1.272(8) 1.541(10) 1.652(12)

1.834(24) 2.166(35) 2.196(47)

1.553(12) 1.75(11) 1.862(23)

2.30(13) 2.13(8)

2.15(9) 1.922(41) 1.969(42) 1.658(18)

1.938(26) 1.677(19)

1.981(31) 1.715(18) 2.31(6) 1.889(24)

0.5609(16) 0.4851(17) 1.0673(46) 0.9182(64)

 = 72.40 14320
0.5549(59) 1.024(21) 1.226(37) 1.402(17) 0.8712(30) 1.233(9) 1.376(12) 1.304(36) 1.375(40) 0.8677(59) 1.256(8) 1.380(35) 1.330(44) 0.893(19) 1.315(14) 1.836(40) 1.125(22) 1.483(14) 1.607(69) 1.591(63) 1.111(17) 1.448(47) 1.783(37) 1.310(12) 1.643(21) 1.0939(39) 1.313(9) 1.434(8) 1.328(8) 1.435(46) 1.593(13) 1.810(48) 1.657(29) 1.412(12) 1.444(52) 1.476(10) 1.610(17)
0.4157(10) 0.7974(65)

 = 73.35 16324
0.4952(44) 0.917(13) 1.168(23) 1.157(28) 0.7535(36) 1.044(13) 1.176(18) 1.198(20) 1.252(30) 0.7608(43) 1.078(16) 1.151(18) 1.202(20) 0.7915(70) 1.147(29) 1.546(15) 1.007(12) 1.302(10) 1.345(35) 1.413(63) 0.982(10) 1.252(19) 1.506(19) 1.136(23) 1.414(13) 0.9398(70) 1.156(6) 1.234(21) 1.1558(40) 1.310(24) 1.400(8) 1.585(21) 1.391(62) 1.236(23) 1.183(20) 1.240(23) 1.292(32)
0.3589(10) 0.6742(40)

Table 31: SU(10) lattice glueball masses for all RP C representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies. 75

RP C A+1 +
A+2 + E ++
T1++ T2++
A-1 + A-2 + E -+ T1-+ T2-+ A+1 - A+2 - E +- T1+-
T2+-
A-1 - A-2 - E -- T1-- T2-- aEf aEk=2

 = 99.86 8316
0.8243(52) 1.574(20) 2.08(8) 2.59(18) 1.547(13) 2.169(54)
2.51(11)
1.549(13) 2.308(62)
1.623(26) 2.39(11) 2.40(27) 1.965(43) 2.47(12) 2.80(16)
1.980(31) 2,58(12) 2.93(34) 2.50(13) 2.85(18) 1.892(24) 2.31(6)
2.27(6)
2.60(29) 2.41(9) 2.54(10) 2.45(10)
0.7470(21) 1.449(28)

SU (12) : aMG

 = 101.55  = 103.03

10316

12320

0.7384(51) 0.6432(32) 1.345(61) 1.130(28) 1.795(42) 1,462(20)

1.915(50) 1.629(30)

1.217(8) 1.748(20) 1.830(31)

1.021(5) 1.429(13) 1.610(18)

1.928(30) 1.52(7) 2.014(34) 1.712(19)

1.225(7) 1.733(21) 1.826(25) 1.959(29)

1.014(13) 1.465(9) 1.597(14) 1.652(14)

1.245(11) 1.055(24) 1.768(51) 1.441(73)

2.37(14) 2.14(10)

1.561(15) 1.346(10) 2.14(6) 1.723(21)

2.23(5) 2.25(6)

1.865(21) 1.945(30)

1.544(56) 1.300(29) 2.042(39) 1.730(16)

2.29(11) 2.001(52)

1.778(36) 1.499(92)

2.20(7) 1.903(29)

1.463(61) 1.827(25) 1.971(33)

1.238(20) 1.543(12) 1.678(16)

1.815(19) 2.207(49) 2.253(62)

1.534(13) 1.878(24) 1.850(22)

2.41(16) 2.18(8)

2.30(10) 1.979(42) 1.938(32)

1.932(52) 1.682(17) 1.696(18)

1.967(30) 1.719(20) 2.153(49) 1.893(29)

0.5702(17) 0.4812(13) 1.087(10) 0.935(8)

 = 104.55 14320
0.5521(42) 1.041(21) 1.288(45) 1.427(17) 0.8636(47) 1.2448(86) 1.408(13) 1.301(35) 1.394(43) 0.8664(58) 1.2537(70) 1.307(35) 1.334(37) 0.896(14) 1.297(52) 1.789(29) 1.126(21) 1.476(10) 1.603(12) 1.662(13) 1.117(16) 1.492(11) 1.763(36) 1.294(48) 1.608(19) 1.065(16) 1.311(7) 1.403(10) 1.293(23) 1.502(55) 1.608(16) 1.851(35) 1.667(33) 1.433(13) 1.376(42) 1.474(11) 1.517(72)
0.4060(20) 0.8001(59)

 = 105.95 16324
0.4920(37) 0.919(12) 1.129(28) 1.214(42) 0.7546(65) 1.058(12) 1.215(7) 1.102(56) 1.235(21) 0.7529(46) 1.0934(48) 1.163(15) 1.183(19) 0.763(9) 1.133(22) 1.555(18) 0.986(13) 1.322(9) 1.384(8) 1.433(10) 0.964(9) 1.255(26) 1.512(18) 1.075(17) 1.341(33) 0.9295(78) 1.122(11) 1.222(15) 1.097(14) 1.342(23) 1.335(31) 1.554(18) 1.435(15) 1.217(26) 1.193(21) 1.285(22) 1.321(31)
0.3482(14) 0.6761(43)

Table 32: SU(12) lattice glueball masses for all RP C representations, with the fundamental, aEf , and k = 2, aEk=2, flux tube energies. 76

SU(2): MG/ continuum limit

R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+

A1 3.781(23) 6.126(38)

6.017(61) 8.00(15)

7.54(10)

A2 7.77(18) 8.56(21)

9.50(18)

E 5.343(30) 7.037(67)

6.967(62) 8.574(83)

7.722(82)

9.58(16)

T1 8.14(10) 8.46(12)

9.06(13) 9.40(13)

9.67(9)

9.83(16)

T2 5.353(23) 7.218(52)

6.997(65) 8.468(86)

8.23(10)

9.47(10)

Table 33: SU(2) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P . Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

77

 SU(3): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.405(21) 5.276(45) 9.32(28) 9.93(49)

5.855(41) 7.29(13)

10.03(47)

7.38(11) 9.18(26)

7.515(50) 9.37(22)

A2 7.705(85) 9.80(22) 7.384(90) 8.96(15) 8.61(20) 11.17(30) 8.94(10) 10.21(20)

8.90(21)

E 4.904(20) 6.211(56) 8.77(12) 7.91(10)

6.728(47) 8.23(9) 9.03(23) 9.39(18)

7.49(9) 9.47(16) 10.39(21) 10.40(22)

7.531(60)

T1 7.698(80) 8.48(12) 6.065(40) 8.31(10) 7.72(11) 8.57(13) 7.21(8) 9.30(14)

9.31(11) 8.66(15) 7.824(56) 9.72(15)

9.56(28) 8.92(10)

T2 4.884(19) 6.393(45) 7.220(86) 8.198(80) 6.814(31) 8.15(7) 8.72(11) 8.99(11)

7.716(70) 9.23(12) 9.060(80) 9.69(13)

7.677(71)

Table 34: SU(3) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

78

 SU(4): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.271(27) 5.020(46) 9.22(22) 10.27(28) 5.827(62) 7.33(11) 10.43(21) 9.95(29)

7.50(11) 8.98(23)

7.73(8)

A2 7.32(12) 9.67(19) 6.87(26) 8.89(13) 8.42(22) 10.69(45) 8.66(16) 10.99(35)

9.57(19)

E 4.721(27) 6.130(52) 8.73(20) 7.80(11)

6.702(45) 7.91(13) 9.28(19) 9.55(13)

7.271(86) 9.13(22) 9.58(20) 10.06(26)

7.586(84)

T1 7.42(12) 7.50(9)

8.47(11) 5.956(42) 7.603(84) 8.59(16) 7.11(8) 8.92(12)

9.10(18) 8.62(17) 7.508(74) 9.86(22)

9.54(23)

8.91(13)

T2 4.750(16) 6.203(33) 7.010(68) 7.787(96) 6.687(51) 8.05(10) 8.53(11) 8.42(14)

7.411(81) 8.25(16) 8.86(8) 9.80(17)

7.492(68)

8.94(20)

Table 35: SU(4) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

79

 SU(5): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.156(31) 4.832(40) 9.04(22) 10.36(18) 5.689(53) 7.38(11) 9.48(30) 9.70(36)

7.36(14) 8.03(30)

7.53(14)

A2 7.31(14) 8.85(32)

9.80(20) 7.333(59) 8.05(23) 9.93(57) 8.75(19) 11.03(37)

E 4.692(22) 6.152(60) 8.54(19) 8.000(51)

6.590(62) 8.19(23) 9.45(18) 9.02(22)

7.31(10) 9.51(17) 9.53(20) 10.22(13)

7.28(10)

T1 7.396(73) 8.29(13) 5.915(45) 7.62(15) 7.19(12) 8.56(15) 7.018(62) 8.53(17)

8.99(22) 8.59(16) 7.624(74) 9.91(26)

8.36(14)

T2 4.686(30) 6.208(47) 7.051(72) 7.87(11) 6.621(55) 7.97(11) 8.28(15) 8.52(9)

7.338(84) 8.45(16) 8.44(16) 10.17(9)

7.53(10)

9.18(13)

Table 36: SU(5) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

80

 SU(6): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.102(32) 4.967(43) 9.37(22) 10.46(17) 6.020(57) 7.14(13) 10.58(21) 10.53(20)

7.51(12) 8.72(31)

7.59(13)

A2 7.46(13) 9.37(25) 7.169(96) 8.71(16) 9.58(24) 10.48(43) 9.00(11) 10.87(38)

9.12(20)

E 4.706(30) 6.098(55) 8.80(11) 8.106(50)

6.43(11) 7.93(15) 8.95(17) 9.48(33)

7.06(13) 9.58(19) 9.34(19) 9.88(11)

7.19(17)

T1 7.435(80) 8.405(88) 5.847(43) 7.41(13) 7.57(10) 8.75(11) 7.066(80) 8.90(11)

9.17(19) 9.23(11) 7.552(85) 9.86(26)

8.46(11)

T2 4.649(28) 6.157(50) 6.997(80) 7.64(14) 6.577(71) 7.92(14) 8.20(19) 8.51(9)

7.189(72) 8.25(11) 8.864(61) 10.20(9)

7.02(10)

9.15(11)

Table 37: SU(6) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

81

SU(8): MG/ continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.099(26) 4.755(58) 8.97(31) 9.69(35) 5.87(7) 6.90(24) 10.06(24) 9.50(39)

7.18(13) 8.25(26)

7.61(7)

A2 7.28(14) 9.80(29) 7.00(12) 8.26(28) 9.06(34) 11.28(25) 8.60(18) 11.40(23)

8.87(48)

E 4.658(32) 6.091(59) 8.53(19) 7.60(11)

6.32(7) 8.23(13) 8.94(24) 9.18(25)

7.26(11) 9.46(24) 8.81(35) 9.57(29)

T1 7.318(74) 8.24(15) 5.801(38) 7.09(17) 7.51(11) 8.60(27) 7.089(55) 8.35(18)

9.21(22) 8.46(22) 7.43(9) 9.60(25)

9.21(25)

8.43(12)

T2 4.661(21) 5.995(61) 6.908(67) 7.863(66) 6.599(84) 8.00(11) 8.01(16) 8.31(12)

7.16(8) 8.38(16) 8.51(12) 9.40(24)

7.23(16)

8.92(15)

Table 38: SU(8) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

82

 SU(10): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.102(37) 4.835(60) 8.92(37) 10.04(36) 5.99(13) 7.03(14) 8.73(60) 9.79(55)

7.15(17) 8.90(68)

7.87(13)

A2 7.20(18) 8.99(35) 6.78(15) 9.06(44) 8.35(50) 11.74(70) 7.83(44) 10.70(70)

8.29(103)?

E 4.587(27) 6.12(10) 8.64(20) 7.60(14)

6.49(9) 8.03(12) 9.04(30) 9.59(33)

7.34(12) 9.36(46) 9.05(30) 9.92(22)

T1 7.14(17) 7.84(27)

8.49(28) 5.776(41) 7.27(17) 8.11(62) 7.039(62) 9.00(24)

9.32(18) 9.53(100) 7.79(13) 10.17(52)

9.69(22)

8.75(21)

T2 4.600(30) 5.94(8) 7.071(55) 7.89(16) 6.638(82) 7.52(17) 7.60(24) 7.82(26)

7.00(18) 7.88(30) 8.60(13) 9.26(36)

7.19(22)

8.77(28)

Table 39: SU(10) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

83

 SU(12): MG/  continuum limit R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

A1 3.151(33) 4.696(65) 9.63(25) 9.57(32) 5.914(82) 6.94(19) 10.50(51) 9.90(58)

7.07(18) 9.56(44)

7.61(19)

A2 7.74(22) 10.16(26) 6.49(17) 9.03(22) 9.64(26) 12.09(74) 8.90(22) 10.66(60)

9.46(46)

E 4.647(33) 6.22(10) 8.52(22) 7.80(14)

6.613(80) 8.28(12) 9.56(43) 9.88(20)

7.67(13)

10.24(29)

T1 6.64(27) 7.59(21)

8.59(12) 5.741(60) 7.50(17) 8.95(16) 7.005(78) 8.83(14)

9.34(18) 9.30(30) 7.48(14) 9.51(48)

8.80(23)

T2 4.645(33) 5.97(7) 6.88(10) 8.20(13) 6.764(57) 8.05(15) 8.16(25) 8.27(31)

7.35(15) 8.89(22) 8.48(25) 10.52(21)

7.20(19)

8.21(30)

Table 40: SU(12) continuum limit of glueball masses in units of the string tension, for all representations, R, of the rotation symmetry of a cube, for both values of parity, P , and charge conjugation, C. Ground states and some excited states. Stars indicate poor fits (see text).

84

SU (): MG/ R P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=-

P=-,C=-

A1 3.072(14) 4.711(25) 9.26(16) 5.805(31) 7.050(68)

10.10(18) 10.14(23)

7.294(63)

A2 7.40(12) 9.73(12) 7.142(75) 8.61(13) 9.14(14) 11.12(24) 8.77(10) 11.38(21)

E 4.582(14) 6.108(44) 8.63(10) 7.951(53)

6.494(33) 8.051(60) 9.14(15) 9.55(13)

7.266(50)

9.84(12)

T1 7.250(47) 8.412(76) 5.760(25) 7.134(86) 7.337(60) 8.79(10) 7.020(39) 8.65(9)

9.142(82) 9.08(12) 7.470(55) 9.81(17)

8.422(84)

T2 4.578(11) 5.965(28) 6.957(41) 6.579(30) 7.883(57) 7.93(11)

7.96(8) 8.22(8)

7.121(45) 8.45(14) 8.63(7) 10.26(10)

7.122(76)

Table 41: Continuum glueball masses in units of the string tension, in the limit N  . Fits are to N  2 or N  3 except for values labelled with a , and  indicates a poor fit, as explained in the text. Labels are R for the representations of the rotation symmetry of a cube, P for parity and C for charge conjugation.

85

continuum J  cubic R

J

cubic R

0

A1

1

T1

2

E + T2

3

A2 + T1 + T2

4

A1 + E + T1 + T2

5

E + 2T1 + T2

6  A1 + A2 + E + T1 + 2T2

7  A2 + E + 2T1 + 2T2

8  A1 + 2E + 2T1 + 2T2

Table 42: Projection of continuum spin J states onto the cubic representations R.

continuum JP C from cubic R

JPC

cubic RP C

0++gs 

A+1 +gs

0++ex1 

A+1 +ex1

2++gs 

E++gs + T2++gs

2++ex1 

E++ex1 + T2++ex1

3++gs *

A+2 +gs + T1++gs(ex1) + T2++ex3(ex2)

4++gs * A+1 +ex2 + E++ex2 +T1++ex1(gs) + T2++ex2(ex3)

0-+gs 

A-1 +gs

0-+ex1 

A-1 +ex1

2-+gs 

E-+gs + T2-+gs

2-+ex1 

E-+ex1 + T2-+ex1

1-+gs 

T1-+gs

2+-gs 

E+-gs + T2+-ex2

1+-gs 

T1+-gs

1+-ex1 

T1+-ex2

3+-gs 

A+2 -gs + T1+-ex1 + T2+-gs

2--gs 

E--gs + T2--gs

1--gs 

T1--gs

Table 43: Identification of continuum JP C states from the results for the cubic representations in Tables 33-41. Ground state denoted by gs, i'th excited state by exi. Where there is some ambiguity, a single star denotes 'likely' while two stars indicate 'significant uncertainty'.

86

JPC
0++ gs 0++ ex1 2++ gs 2++ ex1 3++ gs 4++ gs 0-+ gs 0-+ ex1 2-+ gs 2-+ ex1 1-+ gs 2+- gs 1+- gs 1+- ex1 3+- gs 2-- gs 1-- gs

M(JP C )/ continuum limit
SU(2) SU(3) SU(4)
3.781(23) 3.405(21) 3.271(27) 6.126(38) 5.855(41) 5.827(62) 5.349(20) 4.894(22) 4.742(15) 7.22(6)+ 6.788(40) 6.694(40) 8.13(8) 7.71(9)
7.60(12) 7.36(9) 6.017(61) 5.276(45) 5.020(46) 8.00(15) 7.29(13) 7.33(11) 7.017(50) 6.32(9) 6.182(33) 8.521(65) 8.18(8) 7.91(13) 9.06(13) 8.48(12) 8.47(11)
8.91(15) 8.84(11) 6.065(40) 5.956(42) 7.82(6) 7.51(8) 7.27(12) 7.03(7)
8.08(15) 7.79(9) 8.31(10) 7.60(9)

S U (5) 3.156(31) 5.689(53) 4.690(20) 6.607(45) 7.29(9) 7.41(10) 4.832(40) 7.38(11) 6.187(50) 8.02(11) 8.29(13) 8.49(15) 5.915(45) 7.62(8) 7.13(7) 7.97(6) 7.62(15)

Table 44: Continuum limit of glueball masses, in units of the string tension, for those JP C representations we can identify. Ground state denoted by gs, i'th excited state by exi. Stars explained in text.

87

JPC
0++ gs 0++ ex1 2++ gs 2++ ex1 3++ gs 4++ gs 0-+ gs 0-+ ex1 2-+ gs 2-+ ex1 1-+ gs 2+- gs 1+- gs 1+- ex1 3+- gs 2-- gs 1-- gs

M(JP C )/ continuum limit
SU(6) SU(8) SU(10)
3.102(32) 3.099(26) 3.102(37) 6.020(57) 5.87(7) 5.99(13) 4.678(30) 4.660(20) 4.594(25) 6.54(7) 6.60(9) 6.57(9) 7.44(8) 7.34(11) 7.14(18)
7.20(7) 7.32(15)
4.967(43) 4.755(58) 4.835(60) 7.14(13) 6.90(24) 7.03(14) 6.148(50) 6.043(55) 6.01(8) 7.92(14) 8.10(11) 7.86(12) 8.41(9) 8.24(15) 8.49(28)
8.83(9) 8.52(12) 8.62(12) 5.847(43) 5.801(38) 5.776(41) 7.55(9) 7.43(9) 7.79(13) 7.067(70) 6.999(70) 7.035(50) 8.05(5) 7.78(7) 7.74(15) 7.41(13) 7.09(17) 7.27(17)

S U (12) 3.151(33) 5.914(82) 4.646(30) 6.71(6)
4.696(65) 6.94(19) 6.05(7) 8.16(15) 8.59(12) 8.50(17) 5.741(60) 7.48(14) 6.89(10) 8.00(15) 7.50(17)

Table 45: Continuum limit of glueball masses, in units of the string tension, for those JP C representations we can identify. Ground state denoted by gs, i'th excited state by exi. Stars explained in text.

88

1++  9.0

M (JP C)/ lower bounds

3-+ 0+- 2+-

0--

 9.7  9.2  8.6  10.0

3--  8.6

Table 46: Lower bounds on masses of some of the low-J ground states not appearing in Tables 44,45.

MJ / ; SU ()

J P=+,C=+ P=-,C=+ P=+,C=- P=-,C=-

0 gs 3.072(14) 4.711(26)

0 ex 5.845(50) 7.050(68)

2 gs 4.599(14) 6.031(38) 8.566(76) 7.910(56)

2 ex 6.582(36) 7.936(54)

1 gs

8.415(76) 5.760(25) 7.26(11)

1 ex

7.473(57)

3 gs 7.263(56)

6.988(41)

4 gs 7.182(71)

Table 47: Large N extrapolation of continuum glueball masses, in units of the string tension, for those JP C representations we can identify. Ground state denoted by gs, first excited state
by ex.

89

QL(nc) : SU (8), Q = 2

 = 45.50, 12320  = 46.70, 16324  = 47.75, 20330

nc Q¯L

QL Q¯L

QL Q¯L

QL

0 0.275(21) 0.836 0.333(23) 1.282 0.410(35) 1.956

1 1.199(6) 0.202 1.286(5) 0.265 1.345(7) 0.351

2 1.575(3) 0.070 1.631(2) 0.082 1.665(3) 0.103

3 1.699(2) 0.041 1.7465(7) 0.044 1.7743(9) 0.053

4 1.7576(7) 0.030 1.8005(6) 0.030 1.8254(6) 0.035

8 1.8437(3) 0.016 1.8781(3) 0.014 1.8970(2) 0.014

12 1.8744(3) 0.013 1.9046(2) 0.010 1.9212(1) 0.009

16 1.8912(3) 0.011 1.9186(2) 0.008 1.9339(1) 0.007

20 1.9021(3) 0.010 1.9275(1) 0.007 1.9418(1) 0.006

Table 48: Lattice topological charge QL as function of number of cooling sweeps, nc, for fields which have QL  2 after 20 cooling sweeps: the average value, with error, and standard deviation. For small, intermediate and large , in SU(8), all with similar volumes in physical
units.

QL(nc) : SU (N ), Q = 2

SU(3),  = 6.235, 18326 SU(5),  = 18.04, 20324 SU(12),  = 105.95, 16324

nc Q¯L

QL

Q¯L

QL

Q¯ L

QL

0 0.334(49) 1.707 0.312(24) 1.871 0.306(26)

1.323

1 1.278(11) 0.380 1.296(5)

0.348 1.293(5)

0.259

2 1.618(6)

0.182 1.638(2)

0.108 1.638(2)

0.082

3 1.731(5)

0.145 1.7525(7) 0.060 1.7519(9)

0.044

4 1.784(4)

0.128 1.8055(5) 0.043 1.8051(6)

0.029

8 1.862(3)

0.094 1.8804(4) 0.023 1.8815(2)

0.013

12 1.888(2)

0.072 1.9061(3) 0.018 1.9076(1)

0.008

16 1.900(2)

0.056 1.9197(3) 0.015 1.9214(1)

0.007

20 1.906(2)

0.051 1.9282(2) 0.012 1.9302(1)

0.006

Table 49: Lattice topological charge QL as function of number of cooling sweeps, nc, for fields which have QL  2 after 20 cooling sweeps: the average value, with error, and standard deviation. For SU(3), SU(5), SU(12) lattice fields at similar lattice spacings (in physical
units), and similar to the SU(8) at  = 46.70 in Table 48.

90


6.235 6.338 6.50 6.60 6.70
17.22 17.43 17.63 18.04 18.375
44.10 44.85 45.50 45.50
69.20

topology tunnelling time

Q

~Q



Q

~Q

S U (3)

S U (4)

100(2)

112(2)

11.20

499(9)

520(9)

247(6)

283(6)

11.40 2173(42)

2275(45)

1056(44)

1236(50) 11.60 12674(636)

13371(690)

3399(188)

3731(190)

7973(674)

8973(744)

S U (5)

S U (6)

189(4)

196(4)

25.05 1158(31)

1177(31)

695(13)

721(13)

25.32 5992(262)

6105(272)

2686(90)

2749(93) 25.55 23.6(1.8) × 103 24.4(1.8) × 103

35.7(3.7) × 103 37.0(3.7) × 103 26.22 1.43(99) × 106 1.43(99) × 106

40(17) × 104 44(19) × 104

S U (8)

514(10)

528(10)

26.3(3.5) × 103 26.3(3.5) × 103

7.1(3.5) × 105 7.1(3.5) × 105

12.5(5.1) × 105 12.5(5.1) × 105

S U (10)

S U (12)

4793(211)

4831(214) 99.86 4.83(58) × 104 4.83(58) × 104

Table 50: Average space-time volume

noufm(3b/er of)4s,wweeipths,

Q, between ~Q including

Q = ±1 changes normalised to a standard a correction for `near-dislocations'.

 ln{Q} = b - c(N ) ln{a }

N

c

11N/3 - 5

3 6.82(7) 4 9.27(12) 5 11.13(20)

6.0 9.66 13.33

6 13.50(30) 8 17.58(43)

17.0 24.33

Table 51: Fitted values of c(N) from Fig.39 compared to the asymptotic dilute gas prediction in eqn(34).

91

 2.2986 2.3714 2.427
2.509 2.60 2.65 2.70 2.75 2.80

SU(2) topology

lattice

Q2L

Q2I

8316 2.266(9) 3.057(12)

12316 7.694(42) 9.600(49)

10316 2.705(9) 3.544(12)

14316 7.343(61) 9.220(77)

12316 2.824(7) 3.551(8)

164 6.635(56) 8.066(64)

20316 13.09(19) 15.41(22)

24316 22.56(20) 26.18(23)

16320 3.411(13) 4.067(16)

22320 8.822(58) 10.137(65)

22330 4.491(31) 5.109(33)

304 11.48(10) 12.65(12)

26334 4.702(41) 5.268(45)

28340 3.786(36) 4.181(39)

404 11.07(14) 12.09(14)

34346 4.328(88) 4.711(94)

40354 4.43(12) 4.76(12)

Table 52: Average values of Q2L, after 20 cooling sweeps, in SU(2) for various values of  and lattice sizes. QI is the projection of QL to an integer value.

 5.6924 5.80 5.8941 5.99 6.0625 6.235 6.3380 6.50 6.60 6.70

SU(3) topology

lattice

Q2L

Q2I

8316 4.034(21) 5.452(29)

10316 4.021(13) 5.111(16)

12316 3.570(35) 4.352(43)

14320 3.790(48) 4.428(56)

14320 2.312(22) 2.649(26)

18326 2.32(12) 2.55(13)

22330 2.72(13) 2.94(14)

26338 2.09(20) 2.23(21)

32340 2.60(35) 2.74(37)

36344 1.54(30) 1.61(31)

 10.70 10.85 11.02 11.20 11.40 11.60

SU(4) topology

lattice

Q2L

Q2I

12316 5.813(37) 7.084(48)

14320 5.718(45) 6.674(53)

18320 6.010(95) 6.78(11)

224 5.97(33) 6.57(36)

264 6.19(67) 6.68(73)

304 5.52(73) 5.80(78)

Table 53: Average values of Q2L, after 20 cooling sweeps, in SU(3) and in SU(4) for the values of  and lattices shown. QI is the projection of QL to an integer value.

92

 16.98 17.22 17.43 17.63 18.04 18.375

SU(5) topology

lattice

Q2L

Q2I

10316 3.273(25) 3.906(30)

12316 2.682((60) 3.073(68)

14320 2.95(13) 3.30(14)

16320 2.86(31) 3.15(35)

20324 3.44(1.27) 3.71(1.36)

24330 2.21(86) 2.35(92)

 24.67 25.05 25.32 25.35 25.35

SU(6) topology

lattice

Q2L

Q2I

10316 3.178(45) 3.747(53)

12316 2.50(13) 2.83(15)

14320 2.76(32) 3.07(35)

14320 2.91(60) 3.24(67)

18318 5.83(78) 6.48(87)

Table 54: Average values of Q2L, after 20 cooling sweeps, in SU(5) and in SU(6) for the values of  and lattices shown. QI is the projection of QL to an integer value.

group SU(2) SU(3) SU(4) SU(5) SU(6) SU()

1L/4

 /

0.4773(14)

0.4196(35)

0.3925(25)

0.3786(59)

0.386(13)

0.3655(27)

continuum 

topological 2/ndf

susc1Ie/4p/tibility



[2.509,2.75] 0.46 0.4857(14) [2.509,2.75]

[5.8941,6.60] 0.85 0.4246(36) [5.8941,6.60]

[10.70,11.60] 0.19 0.3964(27) [10.70,11.60]

[16.98,18.375] 0.44 0.3818(60) [16.98,18.375]

[24.67,25.35] 0.29 0.390(12) [24.67,25.35]

0.92 0.3681(28)

2/ndf 0.55 0.89 0.26 0.45 0.30 0.93

Table 55: Continuum limit of the topological susceptibility in units of the string tension for the gauge groups shown; L is from Q2L and I is from Q2I. Fitted range of  also shown, as is the chi-squared per degree of freedom, 2/ndf .

S U (2)



ZQ()

2.452 0.1386(23)

2.65 0.233(12)

2.70 0.239(17)

2.75 0.258(18)

2.80 0.239(22)

Qhot Q=QI = ZQ()QI

S U (3)

S U (4)



ZQ()



ZQ()

5.6924 0.0646(9) 10.70 0.0948(14)

5.80 0.0877(10) 10.85 0.1146(20)

5.99 0.1306(26) 11.02 0.1347(35)

6.0625 0.1462(31) 11.02 0.1397(29)

6.235 0.1808(54) 11.20 0.1524(46)

6.338 0.2044(65) 11.40 0.1710(66)

6.50 0.231(10) 11.60 0.184(10)

6.60 0.232(19)

6.70 0.241(28)

S U (5)



ZQ()

16.98 0.0992(15)

17.22 0.1137(20)

17.43 0.1348(26)

17.63 0.1476(31)

18.04 0.1587(48)

18.375 0.190(11)

Table 56: Multiplicative renormalisation factor, ZQ(), relating the average lattice topological charge, Qhot, calculated on the rough Monte Carlo fields, and the integer valued topological charge QI calculated after 20 `cooling' sweeps of those fields. For the gauge groups and  shown.

93

S U (6)



ZQ()

24.67 0.0976(20)

25.05 0.1132(29)

25.32 0.1316(40)

25.55 0.1444(56)

26.22 0.1716(75)

26.71 0.170(12)

Qhot Q=QI = ZQ()QI

S U (8)

S U (10)



ZQ()



ZQ()

44.10 0.0912(19) 69.20 0.0930(19)

44.85 0.1194(31) 70.38 0.1165(27)

45.50 0.1254(35) 71.38 0.1283(37)

46.10 0.1491(50) 72.40 0.1525(41)

46.70 0.1617(54) 73.35 0.1731(52)

47.75 0.1866(88)

S U (12)



ZQ()

99.86 0.0899(17)

101.55 0.1129(26)

103.03 0.1292(33)

104.55 0.1566(46)

105.95 0.1561(66)

Table 57: Multiplicative renormalisation factor, ZQ(), relating the average lattice topological charge, Qhot, calculated on the rough Monte Carlo fields, and the integer valued topological charge QI calculated after 20 `cooling' sweeps of those fields. For the gauge groups and  shown.

ZQint = 1 - z0g2N - z1(g2N )2

N

z0

z1

2/ndf

2 0.190(30) 0.023(9) 1.17

3 0.162(10) 0.0425(31) 0.62

4 0.156(20) 0.047(7) 1.32

5 0.203(21) 0.035(7) 2.76

6 0.205(30) 0.036(11) 1.37

8 0.187(24) 0.043(9) 1.71

10 0.141(44) 0.060(16) 1.05

12 0.182(24) 0.071(22) 2.22

Table 58: Interpolating funtions for the multiplicative renormalisation factor, ZQ(), for our SU(N ) calculations, with g2N = 2N 2/.

94

0.9 0.8 0.7
aEekf=f1
0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
nt
Figure 1: Effective energies of the ground state of a fundamental k = 1 flux tube winding around a spatial torus, extracted from the best correlator C(t) between t = ant and t = a(nt + 1). For SU(8) and at  = 44.10, 44.85, 45.50, 46.10, 46.70, 47.75 in descending order. Lines are our estimates of the t   asymptotic energies.
95

1.3 1.2 1.1
1
aEeff (t) 0.9
0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
t/a
Figure 2: Effective energies of the ground state of a flux tube winding around a spatial torus, extracted from the best correlator C(t) between t = ant and t = a(nt + 1). For SU(3) and at  = 5.6924, 5.80, 5.8941, 5.99, 6.0625, 6, 235, 6.338, 6.50, 6.60, 6.70 in descending order, on the lattices listed in Table 14. Lines are our estimates of the t   asymptotic energies.
96

1.4
1.2
aEekf=f2 1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
nt
Figure 3: Effective energies of the ground state of a k = 2 flux tube winding around a spatial torus, extracted from the best correlator C(t) between t = ant and t = a(nt + 1). For SU(8) at  = 44.85, 46.10, 47.75 (filled points), in descending order, and similarly for SU(4) at  = 10.85, 11.20, 11.60 (open points). Lines are our estimates of the t   asymptotic energies.
97

1.9

1.8

1.7 k=2
f 1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2 0

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12
a2f

Figure 4: k = 2 string tensions, k, in SU(N) gauge theories for N = 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 in ascending order, in units of the k = 1 fundamental string tension, f . Lines are extrapolations to the continuum limits.

98

2.4
2.2
2 k=2
f 1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08
1/N 2
Figure 5: Continuum limit of k = 2 string tension, k, in units of the k = 1 fundamental string tension, f , for our SU(N) gauge theories. Solid line is the best fit in powers of 1/N and dashed line is the best fit in powers of 1/N2, with the constraint that the ratio is 2 at N = .
99

6.5

6

5.5
gI2(a)N
5

4.5

4

3.5 0

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.a20.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45

Figure 6: Running (mean-field improved) 't Hooft coupling on the lattice scale a, expressed in units of the string tension, for SU(2), ·, SU(3), , SU(4), , SU(5), , SU(6), , SU(8), , SU(10), , SU(12), . Solid and dashed lines are perturbative fits to SU(8) and SU(3) respectively.

100

3 2.5
2
gI2(a)
1.5 1
0.5 0
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 a
Figure 7: Running coupling (mean-field improved) on the lattice scale a, expressed in units of the string tension, for SU(2), ·, SU(3), , SU(4), , SU(5), , SU(6), , SU(8), , SU(10),
, SU(12), .
101

4 3.5
gL2 (a)N
3 2.5
2
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 a
Figure 8: As in Fig. 6 but without mean-field improvement.
102

0.65

0.6 M S
 0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4 0

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
1/N 2

Figure 9: Values of the scale parameter MS in units of the string tension in our SU(N ) gauge theories.

103

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

aMeAf1f

0.9 0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
nt

Figure 10: Effective masses for the lightest three A+1 + (·) and the lightest two A-1 + () glueball states, as well as the main A+1 + ditorelon state (). Lines are mass estimates. All on a 20330 lattice at  = 47.75 in SU(8). In the continuum limit the lightest two glueball states in each sector become the lightest two JP C = 0++ and JP C = 0-+ glueballs. The ditorelon disappears
in the thermodynamic limit.

104

1.4 1.3 1.2 1.1
aMeEfTf2
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4
012345678
nt
Figure 11: Effective masses for the lightest two E++ (·) and T2++ () glueballs; the lightest two E-+ ( ) and T2-+ ( ) glueballs; the lightest E+- ( ) and T2+- () glueballs; and the lightest E-- ( ) and T2-- () glueballs. The state labelled by  is, mainly, the E++ ditorelon. Lines are mass estimates. All on a 20330 lattice at  = 47.75 in SU(8). In the continuum limit each of the E doublets and corresponding T2 triplets will pair up to give the five states of a J = 2 glueball.
105

1.4 1.3 1.2
aMeTf1f 1.1
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
nt
Figure 12: Effective masses for the lightest two T1+- (·) glueballs and the lightest T1-+ ( ) and T1-- ( ) glueballs. Lines are mass estimates. All on a 20330 lattice at  = 47.75 in SU(8). In the continuum limit each of these T1 triplets will give the three states of a J = 1 glueball.
106

2

1.9

1.8

aMeAf-1f-

1.7 1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

nt

Figure 13: Effective masses for the lightest five A-1 - glueballs. Lines are mass estimates. All on a 20330 lattice at  = 47.75 in SU(8). As examples of our heaviest states.

107

9 8 7 MJ++ 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
a2
Figure 14: Lightest two glueball masses in the A+1 + (·), E++ ( ) and T2++ () sectors, in units of the string tension. Lines are linear extrapolations to the continuum limit. In that limit the A+1 + states become the lightest two JP C = 0++ scalar glueballs while the doublet E++ and triplet T2++ pair up to give the five components of each of the lightest two JP C = 2++ glueballs. All in SU(4).
108

10
9
8 MJ -+
7
6
5
4
3 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
a2
Figure 15: Lightest two glueball masses in the A-1 + (·), E-+ ( ) and T2-+ () sectors, in units of the string tension. Lines are linear extrapolations to the continuum limit. In that limit the A-1 + states become the lightest two JP C = 0-+ pseudoscalar glueballs while the doublet E--+ and triplet T2-+ pair up to give the five components of each of the lightest two JP C = 2-+ glueballs. All in SU (4).
109

10 9 8 MJ=1 7 6 5 4 3
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
a2
Figure 16: Lightest two glueball masses in the T1+- (·) representation and the lightest ones in the T1-+ ( ) and T1-- () representations, in units of the string tension. Lines are linear extrapolations to the continuum limit. In that limit the T1+- states become the lightest two JP C = 1+- glueballs while the other two becomes the 1-+ and 1-- ground state glueballs. All in SU(4).
110

10

9.5

9

MJ PC

8.5

8

7.5

7

6.5

6

5.5 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
a2
Figure 17: Masses of the lightest states in the E-- ( ), T2-- ( ) and E+- (·) representations and of the second excited state in the T2+- (). Also lightest A+2 - () and T2+- () and first excited T1+- (). All in units of the string tension. Lines are linear extrapolations to the continuum limit. In that limit the E-- and T2-- states pair up to give the lightest JP C = 2-- glueball, as do the E+- and second excited T2+- to give the lightest JP C = 2+- glueball. The other three states (a singlet and two triplets) converge to give the seven components of the lightest JP C = 3+- glueball. All in SU (4).

111

10

9

8

7 MJ =0
 6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

1/N 2

Figure 18: Continuum masses of the lightest (·) and first excited ( ) JP C = 0++ scalars and of the lightest () and first excited ( ) 0-+ pseudoscalars, in units of the string tension. The state denoted by is either the 4++ ground state or the second excited 0++. With
extrapolations from values in the range N  [2, 12] to N = .

112

10

9

8 MJ=2
7

6

5

4

3

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

1/N 2

Figure 19: Continuum masses of the lightest (·) and first excited () JP C = 2++ tensors, the lightest ( ) and first excited ( ) 2-+ pseudotensors, the lightest 2+- (), and the lightest 2-- ( ), all in units of the string tension. With extrapolations to N =  from N  12.

113

10

9

MJ=1 8 7

6

5

4

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

1/N 2

Figure 20: Continuum masses of the lightest (·) and first excited () JP C = 1+- glueballs, as well as the lightest 1-+ () and 1-- ( ) glueballs. in units of the string tension, with
extrapolations to N = .

114

10

9 MJ =3
 8

7

6

5

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

1/N 2

Figure 21: Continuum masses of the lightest JP C = 3++ (·) and JP C = 3+- () glueballs,in units of the string tension, with extrapolations to N = .

115

1.6

1.4

1.2
aEeff (t)
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

t/a

Figure 22: Effective masses for the lightest few glueballs in the `scalar' A+1 + representation, for the single trace operators () and for the same set augmented with double trace operators
(filled points), with points shifted for clarity. The extra `scattering' state amongst the latter is shown as . Horizontal line indicates twice the mass of the lightest glueball. On the 26326
lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

116

2

1.8

1.6

aEeff (t) 1.4
1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 23: Effective masses for the lightest three states in the `scalar' A+1 + representation, for the double trace operators. Lower horizontal line indicates the mass of the lightest glueball, and upper horizontal line indicates twice the mass of the lightest glueball. On the 26326 lattice
at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

117

1.6

1.4

aEeff (t) 1.2
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

t/a

Figure 24: Effective masses for the lightest few glueballs in the 'tensor' T2++ representation, for the single trace operators () and for the same set augmented with double trace operators
(filled points), with points shifted for clarity. The extra `scattering' state amongst the latter is shown as . Horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

118

2.2

2

1.8
aEeff (t)
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 25: Effective masses for the lightest three states in the `tensor' T2++ representation using the double trace operators. Lower horizontal line indicates the mass of the lightest T2++ glueball, and upper horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and T2++ glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

119

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.5
aEeff (t) 1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 26: Effective masses for the lightest few glueballs in the C = - 'vector' T1+- representation, for the single trace operators () and for the same set augmented with double trace
operators (filled points), with points shifted for clarity. The extra `scattering' state amongst the latter is shown as . Horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and T1+- glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

120

2

1.8

1.6
aEeff (t)
1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 27: Effective masses for the lightest three states in the C = - `vector' T1+- representation, for the double trace operators. Lower horizontal line indicates the mass of the lightest T1+- glueball, and upper horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and T1+- glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

121

2

1.8

1.6
aEeff (t) 1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 28: Effective masses for the lightest few glueballs in the `pseudoscalar' A-1 + representation, for the single trace operators () and for the same set augmented with double trace
operators (filled points), with points shifted for clarity. The likely extra `scattering' state amongst the latter is shown as . Horizontal line indicates the sum of the lightest A+1 + and A-1 + glueball masses. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

122

2.2

2

1.8
aEeff (t)
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 29: Effective masses for the lightest three states in the `pseudoscalar' A-1 + representation, for the double trace operators. Lower horizontal line indicates the mass of the lightest A-1 + glueball, and upper horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and A-1 + glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

123

2.2

2

1.8
aEeff (t)
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 30: Effective masses for the lightest few glueballs in the 'pseudo-tensor' E-+ representation, for the single trace operators () and for the same set augmented with double trace operators (filled points), with points shifted for clarity. The extra `scattering' state amongst the latter is either or or a mixture of these. Horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and E-+ glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

124

2.4

2.2

2

aEeff (t) 1.8
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0

1

2

3

4

5

t/a

Figure 31: Effective masses for the lightest three states in the 'pseudo-tensor' E-+, for the double trace operators. Lower horizontal line indicates the mass of the lightest E-+ glueball, and upper horizontal line indicates the sum of the masses of the lightest A+1 + and E-+ glueballs. On the 26326 lattice at  = 6.235 in SU(3).

125

10000

9000

8000

7000
N (QL)
6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

-4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

QL

Figure 32: The number of lattice fields with topological charge QL after 2 () and after 20 (·) cooling sweeps, from a sequence of SU(5) fields generated at  = 17.63. QL = 0 points suppressed.

126

6000

5500

5000

4500

N (QL)4000
3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

-4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

QL

Figure 33: The number of lattice fields with topological charge QL after 2 () and after 20 (·) cooling sweeps, from a sequence of SU(8) fields generated at  = 47.75. QL = 0 points suppressed.

127

2.5

2
QL
1.5

1

0.5

0

0

10000

20000

30000

40000

50000

sweeps

Figure 34: The lattice topological charge QL for two sequences of SU(8) lattice fields, calcu-
lated after 2 (, ) and 20 (·, ) cooling sweeps. Calculations of QL made every 100 Monte Carlo sweeps for each sequence of 50000 sweeps, at  = 47.75 on a 20330 lattice.

128

3

2

QL 1
0

-1

-2

-3 0

10000

20000

30000

sweeps

40000

50000

Figure 35: The lattice topological charge QL for a sequence of SU(5) lattice fields after 2 ()
and 20 (·) cooling sweeps. Calculations of QL every 100 Monte Carlo sweeps over a sequence of 50000 sweeps, at  = 17.63 on a 16320 lattice.

129

1400

1200

N (QL)1000
800

600

400

200

0

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

QL

Figure 36: The distribution in the topological charge QL as obtained after 2 cooling sweeps, for fields that after 20 cooling sweeps have topological charges Q = 0 (), Q = 1 ( ) and
Q = 2 ( ). QL = 0 points suppressed. From the same sequence of SU(8) fields generated at  = 47.75 plotted in Fig.33.

130

500

400
N (QL)
300

200

100

0

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

QL

Figure 37: The distribution in the topological charge QL as obtained after only 1 cooling sweep, for fields that after 20 cooling sweeps have topological charges Q = 0 (), Q = 1 ( )
and Q = 2 ( ). QL = 0 points suppressed. From the same sequence of SU(8) fields generated at  = 47.75 plotted in Fig.33.

131

16 14 12
ln{~Q}10
8 6 4 2 0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
N
Figure 38: Correlation length |T ildeQ, the average number of sweeps between changes of Qby ±1, measured for the SU(N) lattice topological charge for a   0.15 (·) and for a   0.33 (). Lines are fits ~Q = b exp{cN }.
132

16

14

12
ln{~Q}10

8

6

4

2

0
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 ln{1.18/a2} 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8

Figure 39: against the

Variation of ~Q, the average number of sweeps between lattice spacing and normalised to our standard space-time

vcholaunmgeesVof=Q(3b/y±)14,.

For SU(3) (·), SU(4) (), SU(5) ( ), SU(6) ( ), SU(8) ( ). overlapping are obtained at same a but from different volumes.

The two Lines are

pfiatisrs~Qof=pob{in1t/sanear}lcy.

133

0.55

0.5 1/4 0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3 0

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
a2

Figure 40: Continuum extrapolations of the topological susceptibility in units of the string tension for continuum SU(2), , SU(3), ·, SU(4), , and SU(5), , gauge theories.

134

0.8

0.7

0.6

1/4 

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3

1/N 2

Figure 41: Topological susceptibility in units of the string tension for continuum SU(N) gauge theories with N = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For integer valued charge, ·, and for non-integer lattice charge, . Points shifted slightly for clarity. Lines are extrapolations to N = .

135

0.8 0.6 0.4
QL nc=0 0.2
0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 -0.8
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
Q
Figure 42: Average value of topological charge on lattice fields that have charge Q after 20 cooling sweeps. In SU(8) at  = 44.10, ,  = 45.50, , and  = 46.70, ·. Slope of fits gives the renormalisation factor ZQ().
136

