Plasticity as a link between spatially explicit, distance-independent, and whole-stand forest growth models
Oscar Garc´ia
ORCID: 0000-0002-8995-1341 garcia@ dasometrics. net

arXiv:2106.01867v1 [q-bio.PE] 30 May 2021

Abstract
Models at various levels of resolution are commonly used, both for forest management and in ecological research. They all have comparative advantages and disadvantages, making desirable a better understanding of the relationships between the various approaches. It is found that accounting for crown and root plasticity creates more realistic links between spatial and non-spatial models than simply ignoring spatial structure. The article reviews also the connection between distance-independent models and size distributions, and how distributions evolve over time and relate to whole-stand descriptions. In addition, some ways in which standlevel knowledge feeds back into detailed individual-tree formulations are demonstrated. The presentation intends to be accessible to non-specialists.
Study implications: Introducing plasticity improves the representation of physio-ecological processes in spatial modelling. Plasticity explains in part the practical success of distance-independent models. The nature of size distributions and their relationship to individual-tree and whole-stand models are discussed. I point out limitations of various approaches and questions for future research.
Keywords: growth and yield, competition, spatial statistics, stochastic processes, causal inference

Introduction
According to the level of detail, forest growth models are classified into three types (Weiskittel et al 2011, Burkhart and Tom´e 2012, M¨akel¨a and Valentine 2020): (1) individual-tree distancedependent, or spatial, where the state of a stand is specified by sizes and spatial coordinates of every tree in a sample, (2) individual-tree distanceindependent, or non-spatial, which do not use coordinates, and (3) whole-stand models, where the state is described by aggregate stand-level variables such as top height, trees per hectare and basal area. It is easier to invoke physio-ecological mechanisms in the formulation of the more detailed models. On the other hand, aggregated models, although more abstract, have the potential for producing more accurate forecasts. Therefore, there has been interest in linking the different description levels to exploit their relative strengths. This implies both mathematically deriving less detailed models from the more detailed ones, and using stand-level knowledge to guide individual-tree formulations. At-
Manuscript in review.

tempted syntheses have generally used mean-field approximations that ignore spatial structure and individual variability (e.g. Daniels and Burkhart 1988, Picard and Franc 2004). Here I explore the role of crown and root plasticity, and the use of a perfect plasticity approximation as a more realistic alternative for linking description levels.
The next section reviews relevant aspects of spatial models. It focuses on models motivated by ecological mechanisms, ignoring individual-tree models based on empirical competition indices. Conventional spatial models use lower-stem coordinates, considering the tree as a rigid radially symmetric unit. In reality, competing crowns and roots are displaced by leaning and differential growth in the direction of less contested spaces (plasticity). The implications are discussed in the Plasticity section. When displacement is not constrained (no large gaps), in the perfect plasticity limit, the stem coordinates become irrelevant and the model becomes distance-independent. The section that follows, Stand-level Implications, relates a perfect plasticity
May 2021

model to stand-level observations on canopy depth and gross volume increment. The Distributions section connects distance-independent models to size distributions, which in turn determine whole-stand variables. It includes a brief review of how tree growth equations determine the evolution of distributions over time. It is important to realize that traditional size distribution applications only make sense as large-area limits, where tree interactions and spatial correlations can be neglected. The article ends with Discussion and Conclusions, summarizing the main points and highlighting several open research questions.
The presentation intends to be compact and accessible to non-specialists. Mathematical derivations can be skipped without missing much. To simplify, only intraspecific competition is considered, ignoring complications arising from species mixtures. More details can be found in "A Gentle Guide to Fully Spatial Models", part of the documentation for the siplab simulation package at https://CRAN.R-project.org/package= siplab. To avoid repetitive and distracting citations, refer to that report for pointers to the literature unless indicated otherwise.
Spatial Models
Trees compete above ground and/or below ground for one or more limiting resources: light, water, nutrients. Resources are commonly assumed to be available at a uniform rate per unit area, so that competition can be expressed in terms of horizontal area or growing space (Oliver and Larson 1996, Ashton and Kelty 2018). Most mechanistic individual-tree growth models can be described through an influence function that represents the relative competitive strength of a tree of a certain species and size as a function of distance from the tree location. The resource available in any small area is allocated to the competing trees depending on their influence values at that point. In turn, the total resource captured by each tree determines its growth rate and mortality risk.
An example that is easy to visualize is the TASS model of Mitchell (1975). This model has been highly influential, and versions of it are still in use (Weiskittel et al 2011, M¨akel¨a and Valentine 2020, Strigul et al 2008). TASS assumes that branch growth in length is proportional to height increment, decreasing with distance from the top. Every year, a new layer of foliage forms near the tip of the

Figure 1: TASS model. Foliage layers accumulate causing the crown to move up, maintaining its shape (after Mitchell (1975)).
branches. Foliage eventually dies at a certain depth into the canopy, where losses from respiration exceed gains from photosynthesis. Consequently, the live crown moves up with height growth, maintaining a constant shape (Fig. 1). Branch growth stops on contact with neighboring trees. Tree stem volume growth depends on the amount of intercepted light, proportional to a depth-weighted amount of live foliage computed by numerical integration on a 3-dimensional grid.
Figure 2: TASS model. Top view, growing-space tessellation.
A simpler approach gives an equivalent result for closed canopies. Consider as an influence function the height of the upper surface of the potential crown (the crown for a tree without competitors). The actual crown extends over the area where the

2

tree influence is higher than that of the other trees, and the light interception is proportional to that horizontal projection area (Figs. 1, 2). On free crown edges, this would overestimate the amount of foliage and light interception, although the effect is likely to be small except for very young trees -- see the rightmost edge in Fig. 1.
The model can be generalized in several ways:

aware of any published examples.
All these extensions are implemented in the siplab package. Apart from TASS, other models can be cast in this framework, including those based on EFT and FON approaches (Burkhart and Tom´e 2012, Sect. 9.2.2.6). These have used a variety of influence shapes and local symmetry assumptions.

1. In many forest types, the crowns do not interlock or approach each other. For instance, boreal forests typically exhibit crown shyness, with wide gaps between neighboring crowns. In those instances, influence functions can be interpreted more abstractly as a competitive strength or shading potential that extends beyond the physical crown limits. The influence function may also represent below-ground competition for water or nutrients, or a combination of above- and below-ground competition.
2. In TASS, competition is one-sided or completely asymmetric: at any point on the plane, the tree with the highest influence captures all the resource available at that spot. On the contrary, one could assume that the resource is shared among the trees, for instance, in proportion to their local influence function values. Then there is no well-defined tessellation of the growing space, making visualization somewhat less intuitive, and some mathematical derivations become more difficult. Belowground competition is likely to be more symmetric than competition for light. Also, onesided light allotment does not allow trees to survive under the canopy, which may not be realistic in shade-tolerant species. Note that this concept of local symmetry/asymmetry differs from the usual one (Weiner 1990), in that it applies to points and not to whole plants.
3. The benefit of a unit of resource may decrease with distance. Reaching distant areas can imply a higher expense in energy and materials (branches, roots). Then, when integrating the captured resources it may be reasonable to weigh by a distance-dependent efficiency function, what ecophysiologists call resource use efficiency (RUE).
4. Often, the availability of moisture and nutrients is not uniform. Such heterogeneity can induce positive spatial correlations in tree sizes. The effects could be simulated through a resource availability map, although I am not

Plasticity

Spatial individual-tree models normally assume a rigid radially-symmetric influence function, centered on stem-base or breast-height coordinates. In reality, phototropism causes differential branch growth, foliage redistribution, and steam leaning, displacing competing crowns to occupy less contested areas -- crown plasticity. Something similar occurs with roots below ground. Consequently, locations are less important, and full canopy closure occurs earlier and at lower stand densities than predicted by models that ignore plasticity.
A plausible assumption is that trees tend to balance competitive pressure on opposite sides, resulting in a more uniform height z for the influence function intersection points (Fig. 3). In three dimensions, with radially symmetric influence functions (circular horizontal cross-sections), it is not possible to achieve an exactly uniform z, but plasticity tends to minimize its variability (Strigul et al 2008). Alternatively, one could allow the crosssections to deform into a polygonal shape at the intersection level z, specifying the influence function more loosely through its cross-sectional area as a function of distance from the top: A = f (h - z).
If there are no limits to the displacements, one has the perfect plasticity approximation, PPA (Strigul et al 2008). With full canopy closure and one-sided competition, ignoring variation of influence intersection levels around a mean z, the growing space for tree i is

Ai = fi(hi - z) .

(1)

The sum over all the trees must equal the total area, giving the mean growing space

A = fi(hi - z) = 1/N ,

(2)

where N is the number of trees per unit area. This equation can be solved for z, in general numerically. The growing space of any tree can then be calculated from its size. One can also obtain

3

z*

Figure 3: Top: Crown profiles or influence functions in a spatial model with no plasticity. Bottom: Leaning and shape distortion equalizing neighbors' competition intensity.

efficiency-weighted assimilation indices. For symmetric competition, analogous explicit results are not currently available, and growing space and assimilation can only be approximated by simulation.

There are limits and costs to crown or root displacements, and the PPA would not be realistic for stands with large gaps. With more regular spatial patterns, however, small displacements are sufficient to fulfill the PPA assumptions (Fig. 3). Even for highly heterogeneous natural stands, it has been argued that assuming perfect plasticity is better than assuming no plasticity at all (Strigul et al 2008).

Figure 4: The trees from Fig. 2 with simulated plasticity. Dashed lines join direct competitors, forming a planar triangulation.

In siplab, plasticity can be simulated by iteratively moving the location of each influence function to the centroid of the current available area (Fig. 4). The procedure seems to converge to the proper solution, although the correctness of the algorithm has not been mathematically proven. Du et al (2006) give a proof for a problem equivalent to the case where all trees have the same size. It is possible to include limits or penalties to the displacements from the original tree location.

Figure 5: Froth bubbles. From https://commons.wikimedia. org/w/index.php?title=File:Order_and_Chaos.tif& oldid=461924668.

4

Beyond specific details, the importance of the perfect plasticity concept lies in that tree locations become irrelevant. A useful analogy is a froth, where bubbles move in equilibrium with their neighbors (Fig. 5). There are also similarities with circle packing problems (Fig. 6). Some of the extensive mathematical work on circle packing might be applicable to competition models (Wikipedia contributors 2021, Stephenson 2005).

where h is tree size, r is radial distance from the tree location (or influence function center), and a and b are parameters. As tree size we use height in preference to the more commonly used stem diameter or volume, since stem thickness is unlikely to have a direct causal effect on volume or biomass growth rates. Equation (3) is fairly flexible. For instance, z = h - 2r1.3 is a close approximation to the TASS potential crown profile z = h-6.1[exp(r/3.432)-1].
From eq. (3), the cross-sectional area r2 of the influence surface at a level z is [(h - z)/b]2/a  c(h - z)2/a. Therefore, as in the previous section, with perfect plasticity the growing space of tree i is

Ai = c(hi - z)2/a ,

(4)

where z satisfies

c(hi - z)2/a = 1/N .

(5)

In general, there is no closed-form solution, but the mean can be approximated using a Taylor expansion

Figure 6: Circle packing. From http://www.adammarcus.com/ journal/circle-packing.
We have implicitly assumed a flat terrain. Topography can be included by using tree-top altitude instead of height above ground (Umeki 1995). The result is a down-slope displacement of the influence functions, consistent with observed tree leaning, but with little or no effect on the relative neighborhood configuration.

Stand-level Implications

Perfect plasticity connects some aggregated stand-level properties to tree-level characteristics. Here we examine the effects of stand density on canopy depth and biomass increment for monospecific stands with one-sided competition and a closed canopy.
Given some reasonable premises about growing space partitioning (Gates et al 1979), it has been found that influence functions should be of the form

z = h - bra ,

(3)

xk  xk + kxk-1(x - x) + k(k - 1) xk-2(x - x)2 2
xk  xk + k(k - 1) xk-2 Var[x] , 2

or

xk  1 + k(k - 1) C2 xk ,

(6)

2

where C is the coefficient of variation. Applying this to eq. (5) it is found that, if C is relatively stable, h-z is approximately proportional to 1/N a/2.
The mean canopy depth is h - z + d, where d is the thickness of the foliage layer, see Figs. 1 and 3. Therefore, it approximates a linear function of 1/N a/2. Studies in forest plantations have produced straight lines for canopy depth over the average spacing 1/ N (M¨akel¨a and Valentine 2020, sect. 2.4.1). That suggests conical influence functions (a = 1) or, more generally, functions where the area increases as the square of distance from the top (eq. (4)).
The annual increment in biomass or stem volume of a tree i could be assumed to be proportional to its growing space Ai. Then, the stand gross increment per unit area (including any trees that might die, also known as gross growth, accretion, or net primary production) would be proportional to the sum of the Ai divided by the stand area. After canopy closure, this ratio is 1 (Figs. 2, 4, and

5

eq. (2)). Therefore, the gross increment in closedcanopy stands, for given site quality, would be constant, regardless stand density. This is known to be a good first approximation (e.g. Hawley and Smith 1954, p. 354), but some dependency on stand density has been observed.

Using eq. (6),

Ai  N A- p
q/2(q + 2)

1 + k(k - 1) C2 2

N Aq/2+1 ,

and from eqs. (4)­(5),

Ai  1-

p

1 + k(k - 1) C2 N -q/2 . (8)

q/2(q + 2)

2

Therefore, provided that the coefficient of variation of Ai does not change much with N , the gross volume or biomass increment in closed stands tends to decrease linearly with N -q/2. A conical efficiency function (q = 1) would produce the straight line of Fig. 7.

Figure 7: Closed-canopy annual gross volume increment per hectare in radiata or Monterey pine plantations (Pinus radiata D. Don), adjusted for site quality. Average spacing is 1/ N , for N in trees per square meter. The symbol + indicates measurements that include mortality. From Garc´ia (1990).

Figure 7 shows gross volume increments over an unusually wide range of densities. The effect of stand density can be explained if resource use efficiency decreases with distance. Total effective assimilation would then decrease with increased spacing. Specifically, consider an efficiency function E(r) = 1 - prq, where r is radial distance from the center of an influence function, and p and q are parameters. To simplify, let us neglect out-ofroundness and take the growing space of tree i, with perfect plasticity and one-sided competition, as a circle with area Ai = Ri2. The efficiency-weighted area Ai can be obtained by adding over narrow rings of radius r and thickness dr. In the limit dr  0,

Ri

Ai = E(r)(2r) dr = 2

0

=Ri2

-

q

p +

2

Riq+2

,

Ri
(1 - prq)r dr
0

from where

Ai

=

Ai

-

p q/2(q

+

2) Aqi /2+1

.

(7)

The growth rate is proportional to the total

weighted area

Ai = N A

= NA -

p

N Aq/2+1 .

q/2(q + 2)

Distributions
Perfect plasticity converts a distance-dependent model into a distance-independent one: a tree growth rate depends on its size, and possibly on stand-level variables like stand density and site quality, but not on neighbor sizes or locations. E.g., see eqs. (1), (7).
The state in a distance-independent model is commonly specified as a tree list, an enumeration of the sizes, usually stem diameters, of the trees in a certain area. Sometimes a weight is assigned to each size, to handle variable probability sampling and to accommodate some mortality projection methods (Weiskittel et al 2011, Sec. 5.5). The tree list is equivalent to a (cumulative) size distribution F (x) that gives the proportion of trees with size less than or equal to x (fig. 8). As the number of trees tends to infinity, F (x) becomes a continuous smooth function with a distribution density f (x) = dF (x)/dx. All this applies also if the "size" is a vector, containing for instance diameter and height, with the convention that (d, h)  (x, y) means d  x and h  y.
Tree size distributions are often treated as probability distributions, although the nature of the analogy and the meaning of the probability are rarely discussed. Considering a number of trees in a certain observation window, such as a sample plot, one might interpret the probability as a proportion of trees when the plot location varies at random

6

F 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

to x. For now assume that x is a single variable, typically stem diameter, that growth is deterministic, and that any mortality is negligible. If x grows from x1 at time t1 to x2 at a later time t2, preservation of the number of trees implies that

F (x2, t2) = F (x1, t1) , for t1  t2 and x1  x2 .

(9)

1/n

Let tree growth be x = g(x)t, where the time

increment t might be finite, typically 1, 5, or 10

years in discrete-time models, or an infinitesimal in

continuous-time models. It follows that

F (x + g(x)t, t + t) = F (x, t) . (10)

5

10

15

20

x, diameter (cm)

Figure 8: Equivalence between tree lists and size distributions. Example with a list of n = 20 tree diameters indicated by tics on the x-axis. The cumulative size distribution F (x), a step function with steps 1/n, gives the proportion of trees with diameters  x for any x. If the tree list had weights wi, the step size would be wi/ wj .

over a stand or forest, a design-based view. Alternatively, the probability may represent uncertainty about the size of a specific tree, a model-based approach. Either way, in general it is unrealistic to take tree sizes as independently distributed: competition induces negative spatial correlations, while micro-site fertility gradients produce positive correlations (Fox et al 2001). For finite observation windows, the distribution should be seen only as a marginal probability distribution. The marginal is sufficient for determining statistics that are linear on the distribution function, like means and totals. However, variances, higher moments and order statistics depend on the joint distribution, and vary with plot size (Fox et al 2001, Sambakhe et al 2014). As the size of the observation window tends to infinity the effect of local interactions vanishes, making the limiting continuous size distribution useful in management to predict product sizes at the stand or compartment level. It is, however, an incomplete state description for stand dynamics if tree interactions are significant.
In principle, with distance-independent growth, it is possible to derive mathematically the evolution of a size distribution, as an alternative to algorithmic tree-list methods. Let F (x, t) be the size distribution in a certain area at time t, that is, the proportion of (live) trees with size less than or equal

This is valid for any number of trees. In the large-area limit where F is continuous, and
in continuous time (t  0), the left-hand side of eq. (10) can be written as the first terms of a Taylor expansion, giving

F (x, t)

F (x, t)

F (x, t) +

g(x)t +

t = F (x, t) ,

x

t

or

F (x, t)

g(x)f (x, t) +

=0,

t

where f (x, t) = F (x, t)/x is the distribution density. Finally, differentiating with respect to x, one obtains the partial differential equation (PDE)

g(x)f (x, t) f (x, t)

+

=0.

x

t

If m(x) is the mortality rate for trees of size x, it is possible to account for mortality with

g(x)f (x, t) f (x, t)

+

+ m(x)f (x, t) = 0 (11)

x

t

(Picard and Franc 2004). Eq. (11) is known in physics as a continuity or Liouville equation (Picard and Franc 2001, 2004), and in ecology as the von F¨orster or McKendrick­von F¨orster equation (Strigul et al 2008). This PDE, together with appropriate boundary conditions (possibly including ingrowth), determines the evolution of the size distribution density over time. In general, it needs to be solved numerically, essentially going back to equations (9), (10).
Two generalizations are important. First, if the growth g(x) is considered stochastic, an additional second-order term appears in the PDE, giving the Fokker-Plank equation, also known as Kolmogorov's forward equation (Suzuki and Unemura

7

1974). Second, as earlier discussed, at least two variables are needed to describe adequately tree growth, e.g., height and biomass or stem volume, or height and diameter. Then, x becomes a vector, and g(x) should be a system of two or more equations. Picard and Franc (2001) discuss these two extensions, although their presentation may be too technical for many readers.
More recently, stochastic differential equations (SDEs) have been found to be a more convenient alternative to Fokker-Plank equations. Instead of describing the evolution of the whole distribution, an SDE gives the changes in the mean and variance. Therefore, it would connect more directly individual-tree with whole stand models. The topic is insufficiently explored in plant ecology, but see Rupsys and Petrauskas (2010) and https://github.com/ogarciav/resde.
Discussion and Conclusions
Plasticity causes crowns, or more generally influence functions, to repel each other. The spatial distribution becomes more regular -- compare Figs. 2 and 4. In the perfect plasticity limit, the dependence on tree coordinates disappears, resource capture and growth depend only on tree size and stand density. Explicit relationships between resource capture and size can be obtained under onesided competition. Equations are not yet available for less than fully asymmetric allotments, only simulated curves have been obtained.
Linear regressions of canopy depth and of gross increment vs. average spacing have been reported in the literature. Those stand-level relationships imply conical influence and efficiency functions, at least under certain plausible modelling assumptions. Some deviations from linearity, however, cannot be ruled out with the data.
In theory, the size distributions that characterize distance-independent models can be projected over time with partial differential equations of the Liouville or von F¨orster type, if tree growth is taken as deterministic. If growth is "random", the resultant stochastic process can be described by FokkerPlank equations, or perhaps more conveniently by stochastic differential equations. A whole-stand model is given by distribution summaries like means and totals. The implementation details are not trivial, especially with realistic multivariate "sizes".
The probability analogy of size distributions assumes that the sizes in a sample are independently

distributed. However, interactions among neighbors and micro-site spatial correlations generate local dependencies. Therefore, size distributions must be viewed only as marginal distributions or as large-area limits. For many purposes that is sufficient, but still, local spatial structure is clearly important for stand development and for the statistics of plot measurements. The effects of micro-site correlations, in particular, have been largely ignored in growth modelling. More research on these topics is needed.
A difficulty with size-dependent growth equations of the form x = g(x), or its continuoustime equivalent, is the confounding of direct and reverse causality: larger trees may grow faster, but also faster-growing trees tend to be larger. Consequently, fit statistics can give an over-optimistic impression of the model's predictive abilities. Conventional statistical inference only measures association, and being based on an inherently symmetric probability theory, cannot discriminate causality direction (Pearl et al 2016, Pearl and Mackenzie 2018). This is not a problem when not extrapolating outside the range of the data, but models are often used to predict under conditions that have not been previously observed.
The general framework described here, besides rising a number of unresolved research questions, can clarify connections between models at different levels of resolution. That should facilitate cross-fertilization, taking advantage of the particular strengths of the various approaches.
References
Ashton MS, Kelty MJ (2018) The Practice of Silviculture: Applied Forest Ecology, 10th edn. John Wiley & Sons
Burkhart HE, Tom´e M (2012) Modeling Forest Trees and Stands. Springer, Netherlands
Daniels RF, Burkhart HE (1988) An integrated system of forest stand models. Forest Ecology and Management 23(2-3):159­177
Du Q, Emelianenko M, Ju L (2006) Convergence of the Lloyd algorithm for computing centroidal Voronoi tessellations. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 44(1):102­119
Fox JC, Ades PK, Bi H (2001) Stochastic structure and individual-tree growth models. Forest Ecology and Management 154:261­276
Garc´ia O (1990) Growth of thinned and pruned stands. In: James RN, Tarlton GL (eds) New Approaches to Spacing and Thinning in Plantation Forestry: Proceedings of a IUFRO Symposium, Rotorua, New Zealand, 10­14 April 1989, Ministry of Forestry, FRI Bulletin No. 151, pp 84­97
Gates DJ, O'Connor AJ, Westcott M (1979) Partitioning the union of disks in plant competition models. Proceedings

8

of the Royal Society of London Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences 367(1728):59­79 Hawley RC, Smith DM (1954) The Practice of Silviculture, 6th edn. John Wiley & Sons, New York Mitchell KJ (1975) Dynamics and simulated yield of Douglas-fir. Forest Science Monograph 17, Society of American Foresters M¨akel¨a A, Valentine HT (2020) Models of Tree and Stand Dynamics. Springer International Publishing Oliver CD, Larson BC (1996) Forest Stand Dynamics, Update edn. John WIley & Sons, Toronto Pearl J, Mackenzie D (2018) The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect. Basic Books, New York Pearl J, Glymour M, Jewell NP (2016) Causal Inference in Statistics: A Primer. John Wiley and Sons Ltd Picard N, Franc A (2001) Aggregation of an individualbased space-dependent model of forest dynamics into distribution-based and space-independent models. Ecological Modelling 145:69­84 Picard N, Franc A (2004) Approximating spatial interactions in a model of forest dynamics. FBMIS 1:91­103 Rupsys P, Petrauskas E (2010) Quantifying tree diameter distributions with one-dimensional diffusion processes. Journal of Biological Systems 18(1):205­221 Sambakhe D, Fortin M, Renaud JP, Deleuze C, Dreyfus P, Picard N (2014) Prediction bias induced by plot size in

forest growth models. Forest Science 60(6):1050­1059 Stephenson K (2005) Introduction to Circle Packing: The
Theory of Discrete Analytic Functions. Cambridge University Press Strigul N, Pristinski D, Purves D, Dushoff J, Pacala S (2008) Scaling from trees to forests: Tractable macroscopic equations for forest dynamics. Ecological Monographs 78(4):523­545 Suzuki T, Unemura T (1974) Forest transition as a stochastic process II. In: Fries J (ed) Growth Models for Tree and Stand Simulation, IUFRO W.P. S4.01-4, Royal College of Forestry, Department of Forest Yield Research. ResearchNotes Nr 30, Stockholm, Sweden, pp 358­379 Umeki K (1995) Modeling the relationship between the asymmetry in crown display and local environment. Ecological Modelling 82(1):11­20 Weiner J (1990) Asynmetric competition in plant populations. Trends Ecol Evol 5 Weiskittel AR, Hann DW, John A Kershaw J, Vanclay JK (2011) Forest Growth and Yield Modeling. WileyBlackwell, 430 p. Wikipedia contributors (2021) Circle packing -- Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/ index.php?title=Circle_packing&oldid=1012189064, [Online; accessed 10-April-2021]

9

