The data paper as a socio-linguistic epistemic object: A content analysis on the rhetorical moves used in data paper abstracts
Kai Li
School of Information Resource Management, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
59 Zhongguancun St, Haidian District, Beijing, China, 100872
+86 13161285125; kai.li@ruc.edu.cn
Chenyue Jiao
School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA
501 E. Daniel St, Champaign, IL, USA, 61820
1-217-305-2995; cjiao4@illinois.edu
Abstract The data paper is an emerging academic genre that focuses on the description of research data objects. However, there is a lack of empirical knowledge about this rising genre in quantitative science studies, particularly from the perspective of its linguistic features. To fill this gap, this research aims to offer a first quantitative examination of which rhetorical moves--rhetorical units performing a coherent narrative function--are used in data paper abstracts, as well as how these moves are used. To this end, we developed a new classification scheme for rhetorical moves in data paper abstracts by expanding a well-received system that focuses on Englishlanguage research article abstracts. We used this expanded scheme to classify and analyze rhetorical moves used in two flagship data journals, Scientific Data and Data in Brief. We found that data papers exhibit a combination of IMRaD- and data-oriented moves and that the usage differences between the journals can be largely explained by journal policies concerning abstract and paper structure. This research offers a novel examination of how the data paper, a novel data-oriented knowledge representation, is composed, which greatly contributes to a deeper understanding of data and data publication in the scholarly communication system.

1 Introduction
The growing amount of research data in the 21st century brings significant changes to the position of data in the scientific system, how scientific research is defined, and how it should be conducted (Callaghan et al., 2012; Gitelman, 2013; Hey et al., 2009). In particular, these recent developments call for greater data transparency in the scholarly ecosystem, as summarized into the FAIR Principles of research data stewardship, i.e., research data should be findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (Wilkinson et al., 2016). A major solution to these new needs is the concept of data publication, which refers to the pipeline through which data are transformed into discrete, well-documented, publishable, and citable objects (Parsons & Fox, 2013). Under this framework, the practice of publishing data objects as academic papers, or data papers, has been embraced by researchers from a broad spectrum of knowledge domains. A data paper is a "scholarly publication of a searchable metadata document describing a particular online accessible dataset, or a group of datasets, published in accordance with the standard academic practices" (Chavan & Penev, 2011, p. 3).
Data papers have been proven to be useful in bridging the gaps between the research system and scientific data. First, published articles are highly effective in attracting citations to data objects, making it easier for data works to receive credit (Borgman, 2016; Jiao & Darch, 2020). Second, academic journals offer a heavily used peer-review pipeline. Despite the known limitations of the peer review system (Lee et al., 2013), publishing data in academic journals is the easiest solution for data to be peer-reviewed (Huang et al., 2013; Mayernik et al., 2015). These reasons support the growing popularity of data papers across various knowledge domains. For example, Candela and colleagues' survey (2015) identified seven dedicated, or exclusive, data journals (journals that only publish data papers) and over a hundred mixed data journals.
As an emerging academic genre, data papers are still far from visible in our research system. A chief reason for the invisibility is a lack of understanding of the textual composition of data papers as an academic genre and how this composition differs from that of regular research articles. On the one hand, data papers are only supposed to describe the collection, processing, and contents of their respective datasets, instead of presenting a study design and results (Callaghan et al., 2012). This definition should give data papers a distinct structure from research articles, for which the IMRaD (introduction, method, results, and discussion) format has been dominant in academic journals during the past several decades (Sollaci & Pereira, 2004). On the other hand, data papers inevitably share many textual similarities with research articles, as both genres are produced under comparable social norms and contexts of scientific knowledge production, such as the peer review system (Li et al., 2020).
This dilemma makes the textual features of data papers an important topic in quantitative science studies, because such features bear strong theoretical implications about how knowledge is produced and communicated from a socio-technical perspective (Bazerman, 1983; Small, 1982; Swales, 1990), and understanding them will facilitate a smoother integration of data papers into the research system. First, socio-linguistic decisions made by researchers could help us better understand the nature of data papers as a representation of scientific knowledge distinct from research articles, and to appreciate their functions in the scholarly communication system. Second, data paper composition practices should be more thoroughly considered in future open

data policies, because data papers have become one of the most important means of publishing research data. However, no empirical research has yet investigated data papers from this critical perspective.
To fill this gap, the present study offers a quantitative examination of rhetorical moves used in abstracts of data papers. The rhetorical move is commonly defined as a "discoursal or rhetorical unit that performs a coherent communicative function in a written or spoken discourse" (Swales, 2004, p. 268). It has been used as a basic research instrument in various research communities focusing on academic writing, ranging from applied linguistics to quantitative science studies (Bazerman, 1988; Cross & Oppenheim, 2006; Swales, 1990; Thelwall, 2019). In this research, we examined the abstracts of data papers because, first of all, the abstract is commonly regarded as an accurate summary of the content of a scientific publication (Hall, 2012). Moreover, the abstract is also the section most frequently accessed by readers and bears a strong news value (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 2016). For these reasons, there is a large body of empirical works examining various linguistic attributes of research article abstracts, especially the move structure of the abstract (Hyland, 2000b; Lorés, 2004; Salager-Meyer, 1992; Stotesbury, 2003).
In this work, we analyzed what rhetorical moves are used, and how they are used, in the abstracts of 360 data papers selected from two flagship data journals, Scientific Data and Data in Brief. Using this paper sample, the following research questions are pursued in this study:
RQ1: What rhetorical moves are used in abstracts of data papers? This question aims to propose a classification scheme for the rhetorical moves used in data paper abstracts, focusing especially on those moves that are not shared by research articles. In this research, we expanded a highly-cited scheme for rhetorical moves in English-language research paper abstracts (Hyland, 2000b) by manually examining 50 randomly-selected data paper abstracts. The revised classification system was further validated during the manual classification process. This new system offers a solid methodological foundation for the present work and any future works on similar topics.
RQ2: How are these moves distributed in the two data journals? This question strives to understand the cross-journal differences in the use of rhetorical moves. Based on the modified classification system, we manually classified all sentences in our paper sample to understand the distribution of rhetorical moves in the space of data paper abstracts. Specifically, we compared how the identified moves were used differently by the journals and sought to explain their differences using the journal policies related to data paper abstract and paper structure. We also examined how the use of moves evolves over time on the journal level. This question deepens our existing knowledge about data papers as an academic genre by introducing a more dynamic perspective.
RQ3: What is the order in which these moves are structured in the abstract? This question examines the distribution of rhetorical moves within the sequence of abstract texts, with the purpose of understanding how rhetorical moves are used to construct data paper abstracts in a more granular manner. We examined how different rhetorical moves are used in different positions in the abstract, which sheds light on the deeper textual characteristics of different rhetorical moves involved in data papers.

2 Literature review
2.1 Data publication and data papers
With the significant growth of research data, the demand for data sharing has also been increasing, so that more data can be used to support knowledge production and scientific reproducibility (Borgman, 2015). Data publication is an important instrument for making data easier to access, understand, and reuse (Parsons & Fox, 2013), to eventually support more effective reuse of data. Data papers have been generally recognized as a new form of data publication and have been increasingly adopted in many research communities (Candela et al., 2015; Gorgolewski et al., 2013). A major distinction between data papers and research article is their focus: while both types of publications are normally peer-reviewed, data papers are designed to describe data objects (Carlson & Oda, 2018), a major divergence from the IMRaD paper structure (Sollaci & Pereira, 2004).
The unique structure of data papers can greatly contribute to data sharing and reuse. First, effective data sharing requires not only the availability of the data object per se, but also sufficient metadata to justify the reusability of the data (Zimmerman, 2007). Data papers thus function as an important incentivizing instrument for researchers to undertake the preparation and sharing of data and its accompanying metadata (Gorgolewski et al., 2013). Second, despite the different paper structures across journals, most require authors to detail methods used to produce the data object and the repository of the dataset (Kim, 2020). Detailed information about how the data object was collected, processed, and shared can support the discovery and evaluation of data papers by other researchers (Faniel et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).
During the past few years, data papers have become an increasingly popular type of scientific publication. Candela et al. (2015) identified over 100 journals that accept data papers, and there is evidence that the number of data papers has continued to increase since then (El-Tawil & Agrawal, 2019). Empirical evidence has also shown that data papers are frequently cited, although the citation pattern normally takes on a highly long-tailed distribution (Kotti & Spinellis, 2019) and the papers may be cited for reasons other than reuse of the data (Jiao & Darch, 2020). Much more empirical investigation, using quantitative and bibliographic data, is needed before we can comprehensively understand the data paper's roles and positions in the scholarly communication system, especially as distinct from regular research articles. The present paper, focusing on the rhetorical moves of data papers, is a step towards this goal.
2.2 Research paper abstract as an academic genre
The abstract is an indispensable component of research articles and is required by most journals as part of an article submission (Martín, 2003). Hyland (2015) observes that "the abstract is generally the readers' first encounter with a text, and is often the point at which they decide whether to continue and give the accompanying article further attention or to ignore it" (p. 63). Underlying this phenomenon is the function of abstracts as a somewhat accurate summary of research articles (Hall, 2012; Salager-Meyer, 1990). This "news value" has been further highlighted in recent years as the pace of academic publication accelerates (Landhuis, 2016).
Given their centrality in the genre of research articles, research article abstracts have been heavily studied in the applied linguistics community, particularly from the perspective of rhetorical moves. For example, dos Santos (1996) and Hyland (2000b) have each proposed a

five-step classification system for rhetorical moves used in English-language research article abstracts. The systems are similar in that they cover the most basic functional units in the IMRaD structure, but Hyland's system is regarded as superior because it was built on a much larger sample size from a broader selection of knowledge domains (Suntara & Usaha, 2013).
Apart from these two classification systems, a large number of empirical works have examined how rhetorical moves are used to construct research article abstracts in different knowledge domains and/or countries (Dahl, 2004; Gillaerts & van de Velde, 2010; Hyland, 2000a; Lorés, 2004; Saeeaw & Tangkiengsirisin, 2014; Samraj, 2002; van Bonn & Swales, 2007). Despite their different scopes, most of these studies (1) have the common aim of supporting pedagogical activities concerned with English-language research article writing and (2) are based on relatively small paper samples and the manual coding method.
Moreover, this line of research is situated in a socio-linguistic approach to scientific documents that can have meaningful conversations with quantitative science studies. Earlier works have shown how textual features, when combined with other quantitative methods (especially the citation analysis method), serve as important indicators of the research community of publications and their roles in scholarly communication (Swales, 1986; White, 2004). We believe this approach will likewise contribute to a deeper understanding of the emerging and heretofore rarely studied genre of data papers. This paper is the first step towards this novel research direction.
3 Method
3.1 Data collection
In this study, we analyzed data papers included in Scientific Data and Data in Brief, two domainindependent flagship data journals. The two journals were selected because, firstly, they are the two leading exclusively data journals, based on journal impact factor, number of publications, and presence in empirical studies (Kim, 2020; Walters, 2020). For this reason, we believe these journals offer a representative sample of data publications. Secondly, both journals were founded in 2014, which provides a meaningful time frame to conduct temporal analyses. We collected all metadata records in these journals from Scopus on November 15, 2020.
While both journals were categorized as exclusively data journals by Stuart (2017), they contain document types beyond data papers. As an illustration, Scopus classified most publications in Data in Brief as Data Papers, but almost 75% of Scientific Data publications as Articles. We validated the Scopus classification with the information on the journal websites. We found that the "data descriptors," as they are classified by Scientific Data, were categorized as either Data Papers or Articles by Scopus, whereas most data papers in Data in Brief were classified as such in Scopus. Based on this information, we removed all publications that are NOT classified as data papers by the journal websites, including both research articles and other publication types (most notably, errata and editorial). Our final sample includes 7,712 data papers from both journals, with 6,335 from Data in Brief and 1,377 from Scientific Data.
From these journals, we selected only data papers published between 2015 and 2020, as both journals were founded in 2014 and there are insufficient papers to analyze in that year. To enable a more meaningful comparison between the journals, we used a stratified sampling approach in

which we randomly selected 30 publications per journal per year. There are 360 data papers in our final sample for manual classification.

For all selected publications, we used the NLTK Python package (Loper & Bird, 2002), a popular natural language processing library used on scientific corpora, to parse abstracts into sentences. After the automatic processing, we examined the results and manually fixed any mistakenly parsed sentences. A total of 2,182 sentences were parsed and analyzed in the following steps.

3.2 Manual classification of rhetorical moves

This research aims to identify rhetorical moves used in data paper abstracts on the sentence level. For this purpose, we expanded the classification scheme proposed by Hyland (2000b) for rhetorical moves in English-language research article abstracts, which is composed of Introduction, Purpose, Method, Product, and Conclusion.

To align this scheme with data papers, two coders manually coded 50 randomly-selected abstracts (from the original 7,712 papers) and independently identified new categories not covered by the scheme. In the end, we added four new rhetorical moves found in our paper sample. Our modified scheme is shown in Table 1, where we highlight the four added moves and state how they are defined in this project. Moreover, we changed Product to Results in our scheme while retaining the original definition proposed by Hyland. This scheme was tested during our manual classification, but we did not find any other category to add.

Table 1: Classification and definition of rhetorical moves in data paper abstracts

Move

Definition

Introduction

Context of the paper

Purpose

Purpose or intention of the paper/research

Method

Research design, procedure, assumptions, approach of the study

Results

Main findings or results

Conclusion

Interpretations of the results beyond the scope of the paper

Data Description Description of the data object that is the topic of the paper

Data Uses

Proposed uses or implications of the data object

Data Accessibility How to get access to the data object

Related Research Article

The research article to which the data object is connected

The majority of the new moves focus on research data, in contrast to the traditional IMRaDoriented moves. These two orientations support the data publication genre, which follows the basic rhetoric of research articles but is dedicated to the description, discovery, and reuse of data objects. We also identified the move of Related Research Article, which serves to link a data paper to another research article where the dataset was initially used. Examples of these moves from our paper sample are offered in Table 2.

Table 2: Examples of rhetorical moves as used in our paper sample

Move

Example

Introduction

"Aspergillus sp. plays an important role in lignocellulosic biomass recycling." (Adav et al., 2015)

Purpose

"This data article describes a detailed synthetic strategy and experimental data for the synthesis of brominated fulvene chromophores..." (Budy et al., 2018)

Method

"Firstly, we establish a robust approach to extracting shorelines from vertical aerial photography, validated against LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) and coastal topography surveys." (Pollard et al., 2019)

Results

"We found that the depletion of Jumonji domain-containing protein 6 (JMJD6) [...] slowed cell proliferation of mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts." (Hu & Imbalzano, 2016)

Conclusion

"As coastal systems are monitored at greater spatial resolution and temporal frequency there is an unprecedented opportunity to determine how and why coastal systems have changed in the past with a view to informing future forecasting." (Pollard et al., 2019)

Data Description

"The data presented here represents the detailed comparative abundances of diverse groups of biomass hydrolyzing enzymes [...] and their post translational modification like deamidation." (Adav et al., 2015)

Data Uses

"The Australian Phytoplankton Database [...] allows analysis of ecological indicators of climate change and eutrophication (e.g., changes in distribution; diatom:dinoflagellate ratios)." (Davies et al., 2016)

"We have lodged this dataset with the Australian Ocean Data Data Accessibility Network (http://portal.aodn.org.au/) allowing public access."
(Davies et al., 2016)

Related Research Article

"Here, we provide data related to the research article entitled `Quantitative proteomics study of Aspergillus fumigatus secretome revealed deamidation of secretory enzymes' by Adav et al. (J. Proteomics (2015) [1])." (Adav et al., 2015)

Two coders independently classified all sentences using the modified classification scheme. Our coding also allows the co-existence of multiple moves in one sentence. In the final coding, 77 sentences contain two moves. For moves in these sentences, we used fractional counting to measure the frequencies of moves on the sentence level, counting each move as 0.5 instead of one sentence. The intercoder reliability is 0.706, which indicates a good agreement (Landis & Koch, 1977). All differences between the coders were resolved before data analysis.

3.3 Abstract-related journal policies

To understand how the rhetorical moves reflect the policies of the two data journals, we also collected policy statements related to data paper abstracts from both journals, focusing on the following two broad areas:
Abstract content and structure: This area concerns policies that directly regulate the content and structure of data paper abstracts. As shown in Table 3, the journals have very similar policies, except that Scientific Data requires that no reference be given in the abstract.

Table 3: Journal policies concerning content and structure of data paper abstracts

Policy Area
Abstract content and structure

Scientific Data
- They should succinctly describe the study, the assay(s) performed, the resulting data and their reuse potential. - It should not make any claims regarding new scientific findings. - No references are allowed in this section. 1

Data in Brief
- Concisely describes the data, its collection process, analysis and reuse potential. - Do not: provide conclusions, results, or mention the word `study'. 2

Paper structure: We also collected paper structure specifications to understand how the paper structure influences the uses of rhetorical moves in paper abstracts. This takes into account the fact that most traditional rhetorical moves correspond to major IMRaD paper sections. As summarized in Table 4, the two data journals have distinct mandated paper structures. It should be noted that these structures are consistently used in their respective journals based on our manual examination and previous evidence (Li & Chen, 2018).

Table 4: Journal policies concerning the structure of data papers

Journal
Scientific Data3

Paper Section Background & Summary
Methods
Data Records

Definition
This section should provide an overview of the study that generated the data, as well as outlining the potential reuse value of the data.
The Methods section in Data Descriptors should describe any steps or procedures used in producing the data.
This section should be used to explain each data record associated with this work, including the repository where this information is stored, and to provide an overview of the

1 https://www.nature.com/sdata/publish/submission-guidelines 2 https://www.elsevier.com/__data/promis_misc/DIB%20Article%20Template%203.2.1.docx
3 The required paper structure as well as the specific requirements of Scientific Data are taken from: https://www.nature.com/sdata/publish/submission-guidelines.

Data in Brief4

Technical Validation Usage Notes
Value of Data
Data Description Experimental Design, Materials, and Methods

data files and their formats.
This section should present any experiments or analyses that are needed to support the technical quality of the dataset.
'Usage Notes' is an optional section that can be used to provide information that may assist other researchers who reuse your data.
· Why are your data useful or important to the research community?
· Who can use/benefit from the data? · How can the data be (re)used for further insights or
analysis?
Briefly, describe and refer to each data file included in the article and supplementary files or in the repository.
Provide a detailed description of how the data were acquired and analyzed. Aid data reproduction and reuse by offering a more comprehensive description than any related article or previous articles.

3.4 Descriptive analysis: length and complexity of data paper abstracts
Figure 1 summarizes the frequency of papers with specific numbers of rhetorical moves in the paper abstract. The graph shows a normal distribution, where over 80% of articles have three to five rhetorical moves. This pattern is relatively similar across the two journals: the mean number of moves per abstract is 3.85 in Scientific Data and 3.57 in Data in Brief. This difference mirrors the difference in abstract length between these journals (mean of 6.38 sentences in Scientific Data and 5.74 in Data in Brief).
Figure 1: Distribution of data papers by number of moves in the abstract (n = 360)

4 The required paper structure of Data in Brief is taken from: https://www.elsevier.com/__data/promis_misc/DIB%20Article%20Template%203.2.1.docx. Specifications of the paper sections are taken from: https://www.elsevier.com/__data/promis_misc/Data%20in%20Brief%20Article%20at%20a%20Glance%20illustrati on.pdf.

4 Results

4.1 How often are the rhetorical moves used in data paper abstracts?

Table 5 illustrates how the rhetorical moves are distributed in our sample. Introduction, Method, Data Description, and Data Uses are seen to be the most frequently used moves on both the sentence and paper levels. This group of moves covers both IMRaD- and data-oriented functions. A notable finding, contrasting with the journal policies, is that the category of Results is frequently used in abstracts: more than 25% of articles have at least one Results sentence. Following our previous work (Li et al., 2020), this finding challenges the boundaries between research articles and data papers in terms of paper content.
Table 5: Distribution of rhetorical moves in our sample

Rhetorical Moves
Introduction Method
Data Description Data Uses Results Purpose
Related Research Article
Conclusion Data Availability

Sentences (n = 2,182) 514 527 357 227.5 185.5 149
93.5
67.5 61

Papers (n = 360) 217 249 233 188 97 139
93
52 67

Based on Table 5, we compared how the IMRaD moves are distributed in data papers versus research articles. As the control group, we selected two recent works, Amnuai (2019) and

Farzannia & Farnia (2017), both of which examined rhetorical moves used in English-language journal research articles based on Hyland's classification system. The two works focus on accounting and mining engineering, respectively. We acknowledge the difficulty of finding empirical works that can directly match the scope of the journals analyzed in the present work, given the multi-disciplinary nature of both data journals. As such, this comparison is only a preliminary step towards a more comprehensive understanding of the differences between data papers and research articles.

As shown in Table 6, the two distributions based on research articles are highly similar to each other; Purpose, Method, and Results are used in more than 80% of articles in each sample. By comparison, our sample of data papers does not have any dominant categories, partly because of the larger number of categories used in data papers. Purpose, Results, and Conclusion categories are all used much less extensively in data papers than in the two baseline samples; in the latter two cases, this may be explained by the fact that these categories are forbidden by journal policies. On the other side of the story, Introduction is used similarly across corpora, which may indicate that it is one of the most basic building blocks of narratives in both genres.

Table 6: Comparison of IMRaD move use in three paper samples

Rhetorical Moves
Introduction Purpose Method Results
Conclusion

Data Papers Amnuai (2019)

(n = 360)

(n = 30)

60.2% 38.6% 69.1% 26.9% 14.4%

60% 90% 80% 90% 46.7%

Farzannia & Farnia (2017)
(n = 30) 50% 86.7% 90% 93.3% 63.3%

Table 7 summarizes how the moves are used differently by the two journals. There are two notable differences: first, Related Research Article is only used in Data in Brief. This can be explained by the fact that Data in Brief asks authors to include a citation to the research article, when the data paper is submitted via another Elsevier journal (co-submission)5. However, references are specifically forbidden in Scientific Data.

Table 7: Summary of rhetorical move use in the two data journals

Moves
Introduction Method Data

Data in Brief

Sentences Papers (n = 1033) (n = 180)

169

76

303.5

130

142.5

101

Scientific Data

Sentences Papers (n = 1149) (n = 180)

345

141

223.5

119

214.5

132

5 https://www.elsevier.com/__data/promis_misc/DIB%20Article%20Template%203.2.1.docx

Description

Data Uses

61

53

166.5

135

Results

115.5

52

70

45

Purpose

79.5

77

69.5

62

Related

Research

93.5

93

0

0

Article

Conclusion

39.5

29

28

23

Data Availability

29

31

32

36

Second, both Introduction and Data Uses are adopted much more heavily in Scientific Data, which echoes the inclusion of corresponding paper sections in Scientific Data's paper structure. Introduction directly corresponds to the Background & Summary section; Data Uses, to the Usage Notes section. Moves covered by both structures, especially Methods and Data Description, seem to be used similarly across journals. Even though it is difficult to find a direct match between every rhetorical move and paper section, there seems to be a general relationship between the availability of a paper section and how its corresponding move is used in the abstract.
Figure 2 shows the temporal trend of how moves are used on the journal level. We found that most of the moves are relatively consistently used over time by the two journals, despite yearly fluctuations, indicating a relatively stable landscape in the paper sample we examined.
Figure 2: Use of rhetorical moves in the two journals over time

4.2 Order of rhetorical moves in abstracts
To understand the order of rhetorical moves in data paper abstracts, we measured which moves are used as the first and last moves in the abstract. Table 8 shows the top five moves used as the first move in the abstract in our overall sample (left panel), Data in Brief (middle panel), and Scientific Data (right panel). The results show that Introduction is the opening move in more than 50% of abstracts, followed by Data Description and Related Research Article. However, this pattern is vastly different across the two journals: in Scientific Data, nearly 75% of articles use Introduction as the first move, while this number is lower than 40% in Data in Brief. Aligned with results in the previous section, this difference can be explained by the fact that Scientific Data has an Introduction section in the beginning of its paper structure. In Data in Brief, however, Related Research Article, Data Description, and Purpose can frequently be used to start the abstract despite their quite different rhetorical functions. This result suggests a higher level of standardization in data paper abstracts in Scientific Data. Moreover, it is worth noting that the categories of Results, Data Availability, and Conclusion are never used as the first move in the abstract.
Table 8: Most frequent first moves in data paper abstracts from the full sample and individual journals

Full Sample

Move

Percentage of Articles

Introduction

55.6%

Data in Brief

Move

Percentage of Articles

Introduction 36.7%

Scientific Data

Move

Percentage of Articles

Introduction 74.4%

Data Description
Related Research Article Purpose Method

16.9%
10.6% 8.3% 4.7%

Related Research Article
Data Description
Purpose Method

21.1%

Data Description

13.9%

20%
13.3% 5%

Method
Purpose Data Uses

4.4%
3.3% 1.1%

Table 9 shows the distribution of last moves, following the structure of Table 8. The results show that the last move is much less consistent than the first; however, as in Table 8, Scientific Data is more standardized than Data in Brief, as illustrated by the fact that Data Uses appears as the last move in more than 50% of its publications, whereas no single move closes the abstract of more than 20% of Data in Brief publications. The fact that Data Uses is the most frequently used last move in Scientific Data may be partly explained by the fact that Usage Notes is the last section in its paper structure.
Table 9: Most frequently last moves in data paper abstracts from the full sample and individual journals

Full Sample

Move

Percentage of Articles

Data Uses

37.5%

Data Description

9.4%

Conclusion
Data Availability
Related Research Article

9.2% 9.2% 8.9%

Data in Brief

Move

Percentage of Articles

Data Uses

19.4%

Related Research Article

17.8%

Results

12.2%

Method

11.7%

Data Description

10.6%

Scientific Data

Move

Percentage of Articles

Data Uses

55.6%

Conclusion

9.4%

Data Description
Data Availability

8.3% 7.8%

Method

5%

Figure 3 shows the distribution of moves in each move sequence when move complexity is between three and five, the three most dominant levels based on Figure 1. The color of each box represents the percentage of all moves in the position that belong to a specific category. For example, in all three scenarios, Introduction is the most likely to be used as the first move in the abstract. Overall, the graph shows a strong similarity across the three scenarios, which suggests that even though new moves may be added when the abstract becomes longer, the basic relationship between rhetorical moves and data paper abstracts remains consistent.
Figure 3: Likelihood of rhetorical move use by position in abstracts with three to five moves

5 Discussion
5.1 Rhetorical moves used in data papers
The present research strives to understand what rhetorical moves are used in the emerging genre of data paper abstracts. By using the manual coding method, we found that data paper abstracts involve both traditional IMRaD rhetorical moves and new data-focused moves. These two general categories support the two-sided identity of the data paper: that is, it is both a scientific publication following traditional writing norms and a descriptor of data objects. These two aspects of identity embodied in the genre of data papers are not easily distinguishable from each other based on our results as well as earlier evidence (Li et al., 2020).
Our results show that traditional rhetorical moves, as summarized by Hyland (2000b), still have a strong presence in data paper abstracts. For example, Introduction and Methods are the two most frequently used moves in our sample, each appearing in over 60% of examined articles. Moreover, even though both journals specifically required that results not be discussed in data papers, we find that the Results move is used in about 25% of data papers in the sample. One potential explanation of this ostensible difference is that results may have different meanings in these genres, which warrants a future study. Overall, these results indicate that the traditional building blocks of narratives in research articles remain useful in constructing the new genre of data papers, even though they are no longer the sole focus of the new genre of data papers.
More interestingly, data papers introduce new rhetorical moves that are strongly related to the goals of promoting data object sharing and reuse (Jiao & Darch, 2020), including Data Description, Data Uses, Data Availability, and to a lesser extent, Related Research Article. The first three moves serve to offer more granular descriptions of the data objects that are the focus of data papers. Data Description and Data Uses are each used in more than 50% of articles, showing the popularity of these moves. Moreover, both Data Description and Data Uses have been increasingly used in our sample. Generally, these data-related moves have become important components in the narratives of data papers, where they are combined with traditional blocks in the IMRaD structure.

5.2 How these moves are used across journals and over time
Based on our modified classification scheme, this paper quantitatively examines how the rhetorical moves are used by the two selected journals, to gain a dynamic understanding of the genre of data papers. Our results testify that there is general consistency in how rhetorical moves are used in data publications. Most of the move categories are used by both journals and many of them are used similarly across journals, in terms of both frequency and order. This indicates that the data paper can be regarded as a distinct and somewhat stabilized academic genre in terms of its linguistic features.
Despite this general consistency, however, there are some important differences between the journals, which sheds important light on the diversity of genre of data papers. Moreover, we found that many of these differences can be at least partly explained by journal policies about how the abstract should be constructed or the overall paper structure.
One of the starkest differences lies on the fact that the Related Research Article move is only used in Data in Brief, which can be explained by the fact that this journal allows a reference to another research article that is co-submitted with the data paper, whereas Scientific Data specifically forbids the use of references in paper abstracts. Moreover, the much higher usage of Introduction and Data Uses moves in Scientific Data mirrors the use of paper sections in this journal with similar rhetorical functions, which supports the abstract's role as a somewhat accurate summary of the paper content as reported in applied linguistics (Hall, 2012).
On a higher level, these differences indicate the diversity of practices in using the emerging genre of data papers to describe data objects in the current socio-technical environment. One consequence of this diversity is that different journal norms or policies may not have the same capacity to support the discovery and reuse of data objects, which is an important topic to study in future works. Moreover, it can be expected that more conversations will be needed in the future to develop more fine-grained policies about what data papers should describe, as this genre becomes more popular and undertakes greater responsibility in scholarly communication.
6 Conclusion
This paper offers a quantitative study of the rhetorical moves used in data paper abstracts, by analyzing 360 data papers acquired from Scientific Data and Data in Brief, two flagship data journals. We developed a classification scheme for rhetorical moves used in data papers by expanding a similar scheme focusing on research paper abstracts. Using the scheme as the basis of manual classification, we analyzed how these moves are used between the two journals. We found that IMRaD-oriented moves and data-focused moves are mixed in data paper abstracts, supporting a two-sided and intertwined identity of this emerging genre. Moreover, in comparing the journals, we found that journal policies are a major factor underlying the different usage of these moves, which may have long-term implications for the communication of data-focused knowledge and outputs in the research system.
This research addresses the urgent need to understand data papers as an emerging academic genre in the scholarly communication system, particularly from a socio-linguistic perspective, because of the increasing popularity and unique linguistic features of this genre. This work illustrates the diversity and uncertainty of practices in the early years of a new data-centric academic genre and shows how socio-technical factors, especially journal policies, influence

these practices. As a result, this work sheds light on how research data is involved in new modes of knowledge production and highlights important issues in the identity of the data publication. Our results will also serve as an important baseline dataset for future works on the rhetorical structure of data papers, especially those focusing on the disciplinarity of data papers and the differences between data papers and research articles.
Despite its timely contributions, this paper is only the first step towards the goal of understanding data publication as rising academic practices and outputs, and it has a few limitations that should be addressed in future works. First, we only analyzed two domain-independent data journals in this work and did not consider how the disciplinarity of data papers influences their textual features. We acknowledge that academic writing practices are deeply situated in the disciplinary contexts, as shown in earlier empirical evidence (Saeeaw & Tangkiengsirisin, 2014; Suntara & Usaha, 2013). Given the limitations of journal-based classification systems implemented in the Web of Science or Scopus (Shu et al., 2019), we believe that this issue will need to be addressed on the infrastructure level, by developing a more effective approach to classifying data papers by research domain. Second, this study offers only a very preliminary comparison between data papers and research articles; future work in this vein will greatly contribute to a more accurate distinction between data papers and research articles in scientific databases, especially in mixed data journals (i.e., journals accepting both genres discussed above). We plan to address both of these limitations in the next step of our project to better situate data papers in our existing scholarly communication system.
References
Adav, S. S., Ravindran, A., & Sze, S. K. (2015). Data for iTRAQ secretomic analysis of Aspergillus fumigatus in response to different carbon sources. Data in Brief, 3, 175­179.
Amnuai, W. (2019). Analyses of rhetorical moves and linguistic realizations in accounting research article abstracts published in international and Thai-based journals. Sage Open, 9(1), 2158244018822384.
Bazerman, C. (1983). Scientific writing as a social act: A review of the literature of the sociology of science. In New essays in technical and scientific communication: Research, theory, practice (pp. 156­184). Baywood Publishing Company.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental article in science (Vol. 356). University of Wisconsin Press Madison.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (2016). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition/culture/power. Routledge.
Borgman, C. L. (2015). Big data, little data, no data: scholarship in the networked world. MIT press.
Borgman, C. L. (2016). Data citation as a bibliometric oxymoron. Theories of Informetrics and Scholarly Communication, 93­115.
Budy, S. M., Son, D. Y., Balaich, G. J., & Iacono, S. T. (2018). Synthesis of reactive 1,3-

diphenyl-6-aryl-substituted fulvene chromophores. Data in Brief, 19, 1638­1642. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2018.06.026
Callaghan, S., Donegan, S., Pepler, S., Thorley, M., Cunningham, N., Kirsch, P., Ault, L., Bell, P., Bowie, R., Leadbetter, A., Lowry, R., Moncoiffé, G., Harrison, K., Smith-Haddon, B., Weatherby, A., & Wright, D. (2012). Making Data a First Class Scientific Output: Data Citation and Publication by NERC's Environmental Data Centres. International Journal of Digital Curation, 7(1), 107­113. https://doi.org/10.2218/ijdc.v7i1.218
Candela, L., Castelli, D., Manghi, P., & Tani, A. (2015). Data journals: A survey. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 66(9), 1747­1762. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23358
Carlson, D., & Oda, T. (2018). Editorial: Data publication­ESSD goals, practices and recommendations, Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 10, 2275­2278.
Chavan, V., & Penev, L. (2011). The data paper: a mechanism to incentivize data publishing in biodiversity science. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(15), 1.
Cross, C., & Oppenheim, C. (2006). A genre analysis of scientific abstracts. Journal of Documentation, 62(4), 428­446.
Dahl, T. (2004). Some characteristics of argumentative abstracts. Akademisk Prosa, 2(1), 49­67.
Davies, C. H., Coughlan, A., Hallegraeff, G., Ajani, P., Armbrecht, L., Atkins, N., Bonham, P., Brett, S., Brinkman, R., & Burford, M. (2016). A database of marine phytoplankton abundance, biomass and species composition in Australian waters. Scientific Data, 3(1), 1­ 12.
Dos Santos, M. B. (1996). The textual organization of research paper abstracts in applied linguistics. Text-Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse, 16(4), 481­500.
El-Tawil, S., & Agrawal, A. K. (2019). Data Papers: A New Submission Category. Journal of Structural Engineering, 145(12), 1619001.
Faniel, I. M., Frank, R. D., & Yakel, E. (2019). Context from the data reuser's point of view. Journal of Documentation.
Farzannia, S., & Farnia, M. (2017). Genre-based analysis of English and Persian research article abstracts in mining engineering journals. Beyond Words, 5(1), 1­13.
Gillaerts, P., & van de Velde, F. (2010). Interactional metadiscourse in research article abstracts. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(2), 128­139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.02.004
Gitelman, L. (2013). Raw data is an oxymoron. MIT Press.
Gorgolewski, K., Margulies, D. S., & Milham, M. P. (2013). Making data sharing count: a publication-based solution. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7, 9.
Hall, G. M. (2012). How to write a paper. John Wiley & Sons.

Hey, T., Tansley, S., Tolle, K. M., & others. (2009). The fourth paradigm: data-intensive scientific discovery (Vol. 1). Microsoft research Redmond, WA.
Hu, Y.-J., & Imbalzano, A. N. (2016). Global gene expression profiling of JMJD6-and JMJD4depleted mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Scientific Data, 3(1), 1­6.
Huang, X., Hawkins, B. A., & Qiao, G. (2013). Biodiversity data sharing: Will peer-reviewed data papers work? BioScience, 63(1), 5­6.
Hyland, K. (2000a). Disciplinary discourses. Social Interactions in Academic Writing.
Hyland, K. (2000b). Speaking as an insider: promotion and credibility in abstracts. Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing, 63­84.
Hyland, K. (2015). Teaching and researching writing. Routledge.
Jiao, C., & Darch, P. T. (2020). The role of the data paper in scholarly communication. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 57(1), e316.
Kim, J. (2020). An analysis of data paper templates and guidelines: types of contextual information described by data journals. Science Editing, 7(1), 16­23.
Kotti, Z., & Spinellis, D. (2019). Standing on Shoulders or Feet? The Usage of the MSR Data Papers. 2019 IEEE/ACM 16th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 565­576.
Landhuis, E. (2016). Scientific literature: Information overload. Nature, 535(7612), 457­458.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics, 33(1), 159­174. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/843571
Lee, C. J., Sugimoto, C. R., Zhang, G., & Cronin, B. (2013). Bias in peer review. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 64(1), 2­17.
Li, K., & Chen, P. (2018). The narrative structure as a citation context in data papers: A preliminary analysis of Scientific Data. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 55(1), 856­858.
Li, K., Greenberg, J., & Dunic, J. (2020). Data objects and documenting scientific processes: An analysis of data events in biodiversity data papers. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 71(2), 172­182.
Loper, E., & Bird, S. (2002). NLTK: the natural language toolkit. ArXiv Preprint Cs/0205028.
Lorés, R. (2004). On RA abstracts: from rhetorical structure to thematic organisation. English for Specific Purposes, 23(3), 280­302.
Martín, P. M. (2003). A genre analysis of English and Spanish research paper abstracts in experimental social sciences. English for Specific Purposes, 22(1), 25­43. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(01)00033-3
Mayernik, M. S., Callaghan, S., Leigh, R., Tedds, J., & Worley, S. (2015). Peer review of

datasets: When, why, and how. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 96(2), 191­201. https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-13-00083.1
Parsons, M. A., & Fox, P. A. (2013). Is data publication the right metaphor? Data Science Journal, 12(0), WDS32--WDS46.
Pollard, J. A., Brooks, S. M., & Spencer, T. (2019). Harmonising topographic & remotely sensed datasets, a reference dataset for shoreline and beach change analysis. Scientific Data, 6(1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0044-3
Saeeaw, S., & Tangkiengsirisin, S. (2014). Rhetorical variation across research article abstracts in environmental science and applied linguistics. English Language Teaching, 7(8), 81­93. https://doi.org/10.5539/elt.v7n8p81
Salager-Meyer, F. (1990). Discoursal flaws in medical English abstracts: A genre analysis per research-and text-type. Text-Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse, 10(4), 365­384.
Salager-Meyer, F. (1992). A text-type and move analysis study of verb tense and modality distribution in medical English abstracts. English for Specific Purposes, 11(2), 93­113.
Samraj, B. (2002). Disciplinary variation in abstracts: The case of wildlife behavior and conservation biology. Academic Discourse, 40, 56.
Shu, F., Julien, C.-A., Zhang, L., Qiu, J., Zhang, J., & Larivière, V. (2019). Comparing journal and paper level classifications of science. Journal of Informetrics, 13(1), 202­225.
Small, H. (1982). Citation context analysis. Progress in Communication Sciences, 3, 287­310.
Sollaci, L. B., & Pereira, M. G. (2004). The introduction, methods, results, and discussion (IMRAD) structure: a fifty-year survey. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 92(3), 364.
Stotesbury, H. (2003). Evaluation in research article abstracts in the narrative and hard sciences. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(4), 327­341.
Suntara, W., & Usaha, S. (2013). Research Article Abstracts in Two Related Disciplines: Rhetorical Variation between Linguistics and Applied Linguistics. English Language Teaching, 6(2), 84­99.
Swales, J. (1986). Citation analysis and discourse analysis. Applied Linguistics, 7(1), 39­56. http://applij.oxfordjournals.org/content/7/1/39.short
Swales, J. (1990). Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University Press.
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge University Press.
Thelwall, M. (2019). The rhetorical structure of science? A multidisciplinary analysis of article headings. Journal of Informetrics, 13(2), 555­563.
van Bonn, S., & Swales, J. (2007). English and French journal abstracts in the language sciences:

Three exploratory studies. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(2), 93­108.
Walters, W. H. (2020). Data journals: incentivizing data access and documentation within the scholarly communication system. Insights, 33(1).
Wang, X., Duan, Q., & Liang, M. (2021). Understanding the process of data reuse: An extensive review. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, n/a(n/a). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24483
White, H. D. (2004). Citation Analysis and Discourse Analysis Revisited. In Applied Linguistics (Vol. 25, Issue 1, pp. 89-116+132). https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/25.1.89
Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, Ij. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J.-W., da Silva Santos, L. B., Bourne, P. E., Bouwman, J., Brookes, A. J., Clark, T., Crosas, M., Dillo, I., Dumon, O., Edmunds, S., Evelo, C. T., Finkers, R., ... Mons, B. (2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Scientific Data, 3. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18
Zimmerman, A. S. (2007). Not by metadata alone: the use of diverse forms of knowledge to locate data for reuse. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 7(1­2), 5­16. http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00799-007-0015-8

