Quadrature protection of squeezed states in a one dimensional topological insulator

J. Medina Dueñas1, G. O'Ryan Pérez1, Carla Hermann-Avigliano1,2, and L. E. F. Foa Torres1
1Departamento de Física, Facultad de Ciencias Físicas y Matemáticas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile 2ANID - Millenium Science Iniciative Program - Millenium Institute for Research in Optics

arXiv:2106.00869v1 [quant-ph] 2 Jun 2021

What is the role of topology in the propagation of quantum light in photonic lattices? We address this question by studying the propagation of squeezed states in a topological one-dimensional waveguide array, benchmarking our results with those for a topologically trivial localized state, and studying their robustness against disorder. Specifically, we study photon statistics, one-mode and two-mode squeezing, and entanglement generation when the localized state is excited with squeezed light. These quantum properties inherit the shape of the localized state but, more interestingly, and unlike in the topologically trivial case, we find that propagation of squeezed light in a topologically protected state robustly preserves the phase of the squeezed quadrature as the system evolves. We show how this latter topological advantage can be harnessed for quantum information protocols.
During the last decades, a series of discoveries illuminated a way where topological arguments allowed to explain or envision the behavior of electrons in materials [1­5]. Originally discovered in solid state physics, these properties are actually fundamental to wave phenomena within periodic media, allowing for the extension of topological physics to photonics [7­9], mechanical systems [10], and circuits [11], among others [12­14]; where the exploitation of topologically protected boundary states stands as a key aim across these diverse playgrounds. Topological phases have been found in all kinds of crystal and photonic lattices: in one [15, 16], two [17, 18], and three [19­22] dimensions; exhibiting topological phases protected by preserved [4, 18] or broken [3, 6, 23­25] time-reversal invariance, or
J. Medina Dueñas: joamedinaduenas@gmail.com

by crystal symmetries [20, 26]; among many others [27­31].
Not only serving as a convenient experimental playground, topological photonics may bring new phenomena unique to quantum states of light, such as topological protection of photon statistics and quantum correlations [32]. Research in this topic is only recent, nevertheless, the behavior of single- and bi-photon states has been studied in one- and two-dimensional lattices [33­41]. Promising experimental results show quantum interference of topological states [36], and topological protection of quantum properties, such as spectral [37] and spatial [38] correlation and entanglement [39­41]. Quantum topological photonics is thus positioned as a potential solution for decoherence-free transport of quantum information even at room temperature [32].
Research in this area has been focused on Focklike states and, to the best of our knowledge, no studies have addressed the interplay between the topology of the lattice and squeezed light, which serves as a fundamental building block for continuous variable quantum information [42­45]. Photon correlations in squeezed light generate lower than vacuum noise levels in one quadrature of the field at the expense of an increment in the conjugate quadrature. Hence, squeezed light has been central to important breakthroughs in metrology [46, 47]. Furthermore, these correlations may present themselves between distinct modes of the field, giving rise to entangled multimode squeezed states. In particular, two-mode squeezed light allows for deterministic generation of entanglement [45, 48], and in the high squeezing limit correspond to optic EPR states [42], acquiring a central role in quantum information protocols, such as quantum teleportation [49, 50] and quantum computation [51, 52]. However, the correlated nature of these states makes them sensitive to losses and fabrication imperfections in

1

optic systems [53, 54]. It is therefore of high interest to elucidate the effect of a lattices topology on squeezed light, in the search for topological protection of squeezing.
Here, to the best of our knowledge, we present the first results on the propagation of squeezed light in a topological photonic lattice. We study the behavior of photon statistics, squeezing and entanglement in a one-dimensional Su-SchriefferHeeger (SSH) [16, 55, 56] waveguide array when exciting its topologically protected edge state with quadrature squeezed light, employing analytic and numerical techniques. Our focus is to determine the role that the lattices topology plays in this phenomena, establishing an interplay between lattice symmetries and quantum correlations. To this goal we benchmark our results with those of an impurity induced, topologically trivial localized state, and study their response to disorder. A first conclusion that we extract is that quantum properties inherit the localization of the edge state and therefore follow its fate when disorder is introduced. But since mere localization may be generated and preserved under topologically trivial circumstances, one may wonder if any other more remarkable consequence of topology or topological advantage exists. Interestingly, we find that the phase of the squeezed quadrature is preserved in the topological state, providing an advantage for propagation of squeezed light in photonic lattices that may not be replicated by other topologically trivial localized states.
The article is organized as follows. In section 1 we present the SSH system and briefly discuss its topological properties. We then study the system when the edge state is excited with singlemode squeezed light under two different scenarios. In section 2.1, we apply the squeezing operator on the localized eigenmode, studying the distribution of squeezing across the lattice; while in section 2.2, pursuing a more feasible method of squeezing the edge state, we inject single mode squeezed light to the edge waveguide and study its propagation. During section 3 we turn to the behavior of two-mode squeezing in the topological lattice. We start by addressing the relation of two-mode squeezing and entanglement (section 3.1), and later study the propagation of two-mode squeezing along the lattices (section 3.2). Finally, in section 4 we present an application of our results in a quantum teleportation protocol, where

the entanglement resource is topologically protected, which serves as a proof of concept of the relevance of topological protection of quantum information upon practical implementations. The article ends with final remarks and perspectives on section 5.

1 The SSH lattice
The SSH system consists of a one dimensional dimerized chain of identical modes, with alternating hopping amplitudes u and v, described by the hamiltonian

Htop = ua2na2n+1 + va2n+1a2n+2 + h.c. , (1)
n
where an is the annihilation operator at mode n. For a waveguide array, the operators an are bosonic as each mode represents a waveguide, and the hopping amplitudes take units of inverse distance, as well as the eigenvalues of the hamiltonian. The system is formed by two sublattices, even and odd modes, with a unit cell containing sites a2n and a2n+1. Because all modes are identical, the diagonal terms of the hamiltonian can be omitted. The system presents a bulk bandgap of |u - v|, but when considering |u| < |v|, exponentially localized states with zero eigenvalue and perfect sublattice polarization are observed at the edges. These states are protected by the sublattice (chiral) symmetry of the system, meaning that both sublattices are composed by identical modes. Therefore, as long as the onsite terms of the hamiltonian remain identical, large amounts of hopping disorder can be introduced, preserving the zero valued propagation constant (or energy, for a condensed matter system) of the edge state, and its sublattice polarization. On the other hand, for symmetry-breaking onsite disorder, the topological phase of the lattice is broken and these properties fluctuate.
For a semi-infinite SSH lattice, as depicted in Fig. 1-(a), the topological edge state has annihilation operator

Atop = 1 - 2 (-)na2n ,

(2)

n0

where  = u/v, and the absence of odd modes in

Atop reflects sublattice polarization. The amplitude of the topological state at each waveguide is

shown in Fig. 1-(b).

2

(a) Topological system
Impurity system
(b)

... ...

the same spectral separation to the bulk bands. The semi-infinite topologically trivial lattice is depicted in Fig. 1-(a), and the amplitude of its edge state in each waveguide is shown in Fig. 1(b). In contrast to the topological edge state, the impurity induced one does not present any symmetry protected properties, so its propagation constant and spatial distribution will vary upon any type of disorder present in the lattice.

Figure 1: Topological and impurity systems (without disorder) considered through our work. The latter is used to benchmark our results for the topological system. (a) Scheme of the lattices. Sites are represented by grey circles and hoppings by the connecting lines. Unit cell is highlighted in purple. (b) Localized eigenstates probability distribution hosted by each lattice. The states show the same overall exponential decay when adjusting for the different lattice constants, and differ by the sublattice polarization of the topological state.

To benchmark our results we need a reference system. Since we are interested in isolating the effect of topology, a natural candidate is a system hosting a topologically trivial edge state. This motivates us to also consider a non-dimerized one-dimensional chain of identical modes, with an onsite impurity 0, which induces an exponentially localized mode with no topological protection. The hamiltonian of the semi-infinte topologically trivial lattice, with the impurity located at its edge, is





Himpurity = 0a0a0 +  wanan+1 + h.c. ,
n0
(3)

with w the hopping amplitude between neighbor-

ing waveguides. The localized state of this system

is given by its annihilation operator

Aimpurity = 1 - (w/ 0)2 (w/ 0)nan

n0

(4)

= 1 - 2 (-)nan ,

n0

where we have chosen 0 = -w/ so both localized states present the same spatial distribution, with expception of sublattice polarization. We also set w = v/(1 - ) so both states present

2 Single-mode squeezing in a topological state

We now study the behavior of single-mode squeezed light coupled to the topological state under two perspectives: In section 2.1 we consider the state of the system | as single-mode squeezed vacuum of the eigenmode, that is | = SAtop()|0 , with Sa() the single-mode squeezing operator of mode a, given by

Sa() = exp

1 2

a2 - (a)2

,

(5)

with  the squeezing parameter. Experimentally

it would be very challenging to squeeze a collec-

tive mode of the lattice; nevertheless, this sce-

nario provides insight on how quantum proper-

ties present themselves when exciting solely the

topological state. In section 2.2 we turn to a more

feasible scenario, where we excite only the edge

waveguide with single-mode squeezed light, and

study its evolution.

In both cases, we study the distribution of

one- and two-mode squeezing across the lattice,

and their response to disorder, comparing with

the topologically trivial state. We calculate one-

mode squeezing in dB at waveguide n following

Sn = min


10 log10

(Xn())2 (X)2 vacuum

, (6)

where (X)2 vacuum = 1/4 is the variance of the quadratures for a vacuum state, and (Xn())2 = Xn()2 - Xn() 2 is the variance of the field in the  rotated quadrature at
mode n, defined by

1 Xn() = 2

e-ian + eian

.

(7)

Non-zero squeezing is obtained when the field

presents fluctuations lower than those of vac-

uum on any quadrature. Analogously, two-mode

3

squeezing between waveguides n and m is obtained defining the two-mode  rotated quadrature:

Xn,m() =

1

 2

[Xn()

+

Xm()]

.

(8)

When introducing disorder, we construct a lattice with hopping (onsite) disorder d by sampling each hopping (onsite) term from a uniform distribution of width d, centered at the pristine value of the parameter. The results presented for disordered systems are averaged over 50 measurements, each one consisting of 6 random numerical realizations of the lattices.

2.1 Squeezing the eigenstate
We consider semi-infinite lattices, and express their edge states as a linear combination of the operators at each waveguide, A = cnan. For the state | = SA()|0 we find the following expressions for one- and two-mode squeezing:

Figure 2: Distribution of squeezing across the lattice when squeezing the localized eigenstates, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Top (bottom) row shows one-mode (twomode) squeezing. The waveguides at which the observations are made are shown in the legend, with T (I) indicating topological (impurity induced) state. The bottom panels show that two-mode squeezing is sensitive to the phase relation between the modes, obtaining higher squeezing between waveguides 0 and 4 (2) for the topological (impurity induced) state. In the top right panel, non-zero squeezing in waveguide 1 of the topological lattice reveals broken sublattice polarization.

Sn = 10 log10 1 - 2|cn|2e-|| sinh || , (9)
Sn,m = 10 log10 1 - |cn + cm|2e-|| sinh || .
(10)
Our results in Eq. (9) and (10), shown in Fig. 2 as disorder is introduced, indicate that squeezing decays when distancing from the edge, following the exponential decay of the eigenstates. For the pristine lattices, because the topological state at even waveguides shows the same spatial distribution than the impurity induced state, the measured quantities are identical in both systems, but the values obtained at site 2n of the topological lattice are obtained at site n of the impurity one. Furthermore, Eq. (10) reveals that two mode squeezing is sensitive to the phase relation between the individual modes, generating higher squeezing between in-phase modes, being S0,4 (S0,2) the highest, and S0,2 (S0,1) the lowest for the topological (impurity induced) state, as shown in Fig. 2. For the topological lattice, the absence of one-mode squeezing at odd waveguides reflects sublattice polarization of the state, which is broken when introducing onsite disorder, as occurs in Fig. 2, top right panel. Until now, the propagation constant does not seem to take part in the behavior of the systems. In order to

observe its effect, we must study the propagation of the states.
2.2 Propagation of single-mode squeezing
Since squeezing a collective mode of the system might be experimentally very challenging, we now consider a more feasible state of the field, generated by exciting only the edge waveguide with single mode squeezed vacuum, that is |(z = 0) = Sa0()|0 , and study its evolution along the propagation axis z (see appendix A for numerical methods). We report mean photon number at each waveguide, squeezing at the standard non-rotated quadratures X1 = X(0) and X2 = X(/2), and maximal squeezing at any rotated quadrature. To maintain this system as simple as possible, we consider finite lattices of 15 waveguides each. We choose an odd number of waveguides in order to suppress the localized state at the opposite border of the topological lattice, allowing a more accurate comparison between both systems. Even though the topological state at the zero-th waveguide is still topologically protected, whether we may choose to suppress the state at the opposite edge reveals the weak nature of topological phases in one dimension, in particular, of the SSH lattice against per-

4

turbations breaking sublattice symmetry. In this case however, this fragility is used in a beneficial way.
The propagation of the excitation across the pristine lattices is shown in Fig. 3, top row, depicting the mean photon number in each waveguide as both systems evolve. Part of the excitation remains permanently localized near the edge due to coupling with the localized states, generating a distribution of squeezing qualitatively equal to the one presented in section 2.1: Photon number and one-mode squeezing decay while distancing from the edge, respecting sublattice polarization in the topological lattice. Maximum two-mode squeezing is obtained between waveguides 0 and 4 (2) in the topological (impurity) state (see appendix B). These results show that when injecting one-mode squeezing to the edge waveguide, not only does the excitation remain localized, but the quantum properties of the field inherit the shape of the edge state. This is particularly clear when analyzing two-mode squeezing, which proves to be sensitive to the phase relation between the individual modes. We also observe that part of the excitation does not couple to the edge state, but transports across the lattice, which is explained by the non-perfect overlap between the edge state and the zero-th waveguide.
When introducing disorder we do not observe a significant change in the mean photon number of the localized portion of the excitation, which is coupled to the edge state, for neither type of disorder. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 3, transport of the decoupled excitation is obstructed due to Anderson localization of the extended states, forcing the decoupled excitation to remain localized near the edge. In the topological lattice, this causes a persistent non-zero photon number at odd waveguides, even for symmetry-preserving hopping disorder, which does not mean that sublattice polarization of the state is broken, but rather that it is covered by the effects of Anderson localization.
The most remarkable consequences of topological protection, or lack of it, are observed when analyzing one-mode squeezing at the edge waveguide, as shown in Fig. 4-(a). For the pristine lattices we observe that maximal squeezing has an approximately equal value in the topological and impurity state. Because of the zero-valued propagation constant of the topological state,

Figure 3: Photon number in the lattices for  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Top, middle and bottom row show N , in units relative to the initial single-mode squeezed state, for pristine lattices, d = 0.6v hopping disorder, and d = 0.6v onsite disorder respectively, while left and right columns refer to the topological and impurity systems respectively. A portion of the excitation couples to the edge state and remains localized, while the other transports across the disorderless lattice. Disorder induced Anderson localization obstructs transport across the lattice.
its squeezed quadrature is always the initially squeezed quadrature X1, whereas the squeezed quadrature of the impurity induced state rotates, as seen in Fig. 4-(b) and (c). Introduction of hopping disorder reveals the role of topology in the propagation of squeezed light. Maximal squeezing appears to be insensitive to disorder, however, a drastically different behavior is observed for squeezing at quadratures X1 and X2. Because hopping disorder preserves sublattice symmetry, the propagation constant of the topological state remains consistently zero, therefore its maximally squeezed quadrature does not rotate (Fig. 4-(d)). In contrast, random disorder generates fluctuations in the propagation constant of the impurity induced state. Even though maximal squeezing remains similar to that of the pristine lattice, the rotation angle of the squeezed quadrature differs between different random realizations, thus when averaging over them at a fixed quadrature, coherence of the quantum states is lost, and no squeezing is obtained (Fig. 4-(e)).
This discussion is consistent with the results for the onsite disordered lattices. Just as occurred for hopping disorder, the behavior of maximal squeezing is similar to the pristine case. Nevertheless, introduction of onsite disorder breaks

5

Figure 4: Single-mode squeezing at the zero-th waveguide, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. (a) Solid blue (red) curves
with circular (square) marker show squeezing at the maximally squeezed quadrature for the topological (impurity)
state. Dashed (dash-dotted) curves show squeezing at quadrature X1 (X2), following the same color assignment as maximal squeezing. When sublattice symmetry is preserved (pristine and hopping disorder) the topological states
maximally squeezed quadrature is always X1, as the dashed blue curve overlaps with the solid one; but rotates when it is broken (onsite disorder). The impurity states maximally squeezed quadrature always rotates. Fluctuations in
the rotation angle of the squeezed quadrature result in no average squeezing at X1 and X2. Panels (b) to (g) show the Wigner function of the system at the zero-th waveguide (See movie 1 for the evolution of the Wigner functions
on each lattice). (b) Input single-mode squeezed state, squeezed in quadrature X1. (c) Pristine impurity state at z = 0.5v-1, showing rotation of the squeezed quadrature. (d) and (e) Averaged Wigner function of the hopping disordered topological and impurity states respectively, at z = 10v-1. Due to topological protection, the topological
state remains squeezed in quadrature X1. In contrast, the squeezed quadrature of the impurity state differs between different realizations, resulting in no squeezing when averaging over them. (f) and (g) Averaged Wigner function of the onsite disordered topological and impurity states respectively, at z = 10v-1. Broken sublattice symmetry
removes topological protection, thus no average squeezing is obtained at fixed quadratures.

sublattice symmetry in the SSH lattice, therefore its edge state looses topological protection, and its propagation constant ceases to be topologically locked at zero. The fluctuations in the propagation constant between different random realizations causes different rotation angles of their maximally squeezed quadratures, obtaining no squeezing when averaging over them at a fixed quadrature (Fig. 4-(f) and (g)). These results show that when propagating squeezed light through a localized state in a photonic lattice, topological protection of the state allows for phase coherence in the squeezed quadrature.

3 Two-mode squeezing of topological states
Having elucidated the role of topology in the propagation of single-mode squeezed light, we now study two-mode squeezing coupled to respective localized states. In contrast to single-mode squeezing, now the main quantum correlations occur between different modes, giving rise to entanglement. As seen in the previous section, the main consequence of the lattices topology is protection of the squeezed quadrature. We therefore begin this section by studying the effects of rotating the squeezed quadrature on the generation of two-mode squeezing and entanglement for a two-

6

mode squeezed vacuum state (section 3.1). We then study the propagation of two-mode squeezing across a topological lattice, when the edge waveguides hosting the localized states are initially squeezed (section 3.2).

3.1 Two-mode squeezing and entanglement
The two-mode squeezed vacuum state between modes a and b of the field is defined by |a,b = Sa,b()|0 , with Sa,b the two-mode squeezing operator

Sa,b() = exp ab - ab .

(11)

For such a state no one-mode squeezing is measured in the individual modes, as (Xµ())2  (X)2 vacuum, with µ = a, b. On the
other hand, the variance of the two-mode  rotated quadrature is (Xa,b())2 =
[cosh 2|| - sinh 2|| cos( - 2)] /4, with  = ||ei, thus maximal squeezing is measured at

 = /2. We quantify entanglement employing the
Peres-Horodecki criterion for continuous variables [42, 57], stating that the degree of nonseparability is measured by the negativity of the partially transposed density matrix. Implementation of this criterion is as follows: We begin defining the 4 × 4 correlation matrix V by Vi,j = ^i^j + ^j^i /2, with ^ = (Xa(0), Xa(/2), Xb(0), Xb(/2)) the basis of the phase-space representation of the system. The partially transposed correlation matrix is obtained by V~ = V , with  = diag(1, 1, 1, -1), which acts by flipping the sign of Xb(/2). Finally, negativity of the partially transposed density matrix is determined by V~ -  0, with i,j = ^i^j - ^j^i /2. Therefore, the minimum eigenvalue of V~ -  serves as an entanglement measure, revealing non-separability when it takes negative values.
For two-mode squeezed vacuum, the correlation matrix takes the form V = R()V0R(), with

 cosh 2||

0 - sinh 2|| 0 

1 0

cosh 2||

V0

=

4

 - sinh

2||

0

0 cosh 2||

sinh 2||



0

 

,

(12)

0

sinh 2||

0

cosh 2||

and R() = diag(R(/2), R(/2)), with R the 2 × 2 rotation matrix. We observe that, in agreement with the squeezing measurement, any twomode squeezed vacuum state can be represented as a  = 0 state upon a rotation of the phase space basis in /2. Logically, the degree of entanglement between the modes does not depend on the basis choice of the system, but, as we will see next, the entangled variables do depend on this.
The Wigner function of the state is a multivariate gaussian distribution

|V |-1/2 W (|a,b ; ) = (2)2 exp

- 1 T V -1 2

,

(13)

with  = (qa, pa, qb, pb) the corresponding eigen-

values of ^. For  = 0

W (|a,b

; )

=

4 2

exp{-e2||

(qa + qb)2+

(pa - pb)2 - e-2|| (qa - qb)2 + (pa + pb)2 } .

(14)

Taking the infinite squeezing limit ||  , which is unphysical as such a state would require infinite energy, but represents a perfectly correlated maximally entangled state, the Wigner function approaches W  (qa + qb)(pa - pb). From this we conclude that the entangled variables of the system are qa and qb; and pa and pb.
If  = 0, the expression for the Wigner function of the state would be the same as in Eq. (14), but for a rotated phase space basis, that is qµ  qµ cos(/2) + pµ sin(/2), and pµ  pµ cos(/2) - qµ sin(/2). Thus, the entangled variables correspond to a rotation of the basis, R(/2). From this analysis we conclude that,

7

for a two-mode squeezed vacuum state, rotation of the squeezed quadrature does not affect the magnitude of entanglement in the system, but does change the entangled variables. With this in mind, we now study the propagation of two-mode squeezed light in the topological SSH lattice.

3.2 Propagation of two-mode squeezing
We consider two independent SSH lattices of 15 waveguides each, which we label as lattices A and B, each one hosting a topologically protected edge state, and study the propagation of twomode squeezing along the system. For comparison, we also consider topologically trivial lattices hosting impurity induced edge states. The initial state of the field is given by the twomode squeezed vacuum state between the edge waveguide of both lattices, that is |(z = 0) = Sa0,b0()|0 . We explore the response of the systems to hopping and onsite disorder, while reporting two-mode squeezing and entanglement between both edge waveguides.
Fig. 5, left panel, shows the evolution of twomode squeezing along the lattices, whose results agree with those of section 2: Maximal squeezing measured in both systems has an approximately equal value along the propagation direction, which is neither sensitive topology nor disorder. For the topological system, the maximally squeezed quadrature is X1 as long as sublattice symmetry is preserved, because the propagation constant of the edge state is topologically locked to zero. In contrast, if the symmetry is broken by onsite disorder, squeezing measured at quadratures X1 and X2 averages to zero over the random realizations of the system due to fluctuations in the rotation angle of the maximally squeezed quadrature. On the other hand, as the impurity induced edge state does not present any preserved properties, the squeezing values at fixed quadratures are highly sensitive to both types of disorder.
The behavior of entanglement in the systems, portrayed in Fig. 5, right panel, is qualitatively similar to that of maximal two-mode squeezing: it takes an approximately constant value along the propagation axis, and does not appear to be sensitive to disorder. From this perspective, the results indicate that the total amount of quantum correlations present in the system are independent of the topology of the involved edge states.

Figure 5: Two-mode squeezing and entanglement between both edge waveguides, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Left column: solid blue (red) curves with circular (square) marker show squeezing at the maximally squeezed quadrature for the topological (impurity) state. Dashed (dash-dotted) curves show squeezing at quadrature X1 (X2), following the same color assignment as maximal squeezing. Right column: solid blue (dashed red) curves show entanglement for the topological (impurity) state, expressed in units relative to the initial two-mode squeezed vacuum state. Similar to maximal squeezing, entanglement measure is not sensitive to the topology of the edge state nor the type of disorder, but squeezing at the non-rotated quadratures reveal topological protection of the maximally entangled variables (when sublattice symmetry is preserved).
However, they must be interpreted alongside the information provided by squeezing at the nonrotated quadratures, and the discussion of section 3.1. Despite the fact that the amount of entanglement is independent of the topology of the edge state, its topological protection allows to control the maximally entangled variables, protecting them from any symmetry-preserving disorder.
4 Quantum teleportation employing a topological lattice
In this section we demonstrate the previously highlighted consequences of the topological protection of squeezing. For this we implement quantum teleportation of a single-photon, where the two-mode squeezed states studied in section 3.2 serve as the shared entanglement resource. As we will show later in this section, carrying out the teleportation protocol in a topological lat-

8

tice turns out to be advantageous compared with a topologically trivial lattice bearing a localized state. This topological advantage is quantified by a robust fidelity in the presence of disorder. In the following we describe the teleportation protocol and expose our main results.
The protocol [42, 49] is as follows. We wish to to transfer an arbitrary quantum state |in from Alice's location to Bob's, for which we rely on a shared entanglement resource between both parties, given by the state |a,b . We must consider three modes of the field: a and b corresponding to the entangled modes sent to Alice and Bob respectively, and mode c containing the input state. Defining µ = (qµ, pµ) (with µ = a, b, c) the phase space basis of the respective modes, the Wigner function of the system in this initial setup is

W0 (a, b, c) = Wa,b (a, b) Win (c) , (15)
where Wa,b and Win represent the Wigner function of |a,b and |in respectively. Alice couples her entangled mode with the input state at a 50:50 beam splitter, obtaining the Wigner function:

W1 (a, b, c) = W0

a- c 2

,

b,

c+ a 2

.

(16)

Alice then measures the quadratures correspond-

ing to qa and pc, which become classically deter-

mined random variables, following the probability

distribution

P(qa, pc) = dpa dqb dpb dqc W1 (a, b, c) .
(17) Given a pair of measured values qa and pc, the state of the system at Bob's mode collapses to

W2(b|qa, pc) = N dpa dqc W1(a, b, c)

= 2N dx dy Win (x, y)





Wa,b 2qa - x, y - 2pc, qb, pb

, (18)

where normalization must be added explicitly as a result of the non-unitary measurement operation, and we defined 2x = qa + qc and 2y =

pa + pc for the last equality. If the entanglement resource is non-rotated two-mode squeezed vacuum, then Bob's output state approaches the exact input state in the infinite squeezing limit, aside from a phase space displacement, that is W2(b|qa, pc)  W (|in ; qb + 2qa, pb + 2pc). To correct this, Bob displaces his mode, obtaining the final output state, given by the Wigner function





Wout(q, p|qa, pc) = W2(q - 2qa, p- 2pc|qa, pc) .

(19)

For the implementation of this protocol, we

consider that the entangled two-mode squeezed

state is sent to each party through a topological

or trivial photonic lattice, as presented in section

3.2. Thus, at the output of lattice A, Alice ex-

tracts her share of the entangled state from the

edge waveguide of the lattice, tracing out all other

modes; and so does Bob with lattice B. In order

to compare on the same grounds the teleportation

results using both types of lattices, we rotate the

phase space basis so the final state of the pris-

tine lattices are maximally squeezed in quadra-

ture X(0) for either case. Finally, we take the input state as a single-photon, |in = c|0 . Note however, that the teleportation protocol is valid

for any input, which might even be unknown to

our protagonists.

We perform the teleportation for pristine and

hopping disordered lattices (d = 0.3v). The fi-

delity of a single teleportation event is calculated

by F =  dq dp Win(q, p)Wout(q, p|qa, pc). Since the output state depends on the measured values

of qa and pc, and on the random disorder present in the lattice, we report the average fidelity over

all measurements, and all random realizations,

that is

1N F=
N n=1

dqa dpcPF ,

(20)

where N = 300 is the total number of random realizations. We may construct an averaged output Wigner function Wout defined by:

1N Wout(q, p) = N n=1 dqa dpc P(qa, pc) (21)
Wout(q, p|qa, pc) ,

9

Figure 6: Panel (a) shows input Wigner function Win to be teleported. Panels (b) and (d) ((c) and (e)) show the averaged output Wigner function Wout for the pristine and hopping disordered d = 0.3v topological (topologically trivial) lattices. Wigner functions are expressed in units relative to the peak value of Win. The fidelity of the output states is indicated on each panel, and the colorbar on the right applies for panels (b)-(e). Teleportation in the
topological system robustly preserves the quantum coherence of the input state.

so the average fidelity is F =  dq dp WinWout. Even though the output state never takes the exact form of Wout, it allows to visualize the proximity of the output state to the input one in the general case.
When teleporting the single photon state employing the pristine lattices, we find practically identical results between the topological and trivial lattices, as shown in Fig. 6-(b) and (d), characterized by an average fidelity of 0.483 and 0.486 respectively. Comparing with the input Wigner function (Fig. 6-(a)), we observe that the fidelity losses are mainly explained by a reduction of the peak values, and a consequent widening of the function. Negativity of the output function serves as a landmark of the preservation of the input state's quantum nature, which can only be achieved by means of quantum teleportation schemes. Quantitatively, the reduction of the negative peak at the origin with respect to the input state is of 13.9% and 14.3% in the topological and trivial systems respectively.
The averaged output state of the topological system remains practically unchanged when introducing hopping disorder, as shown Fig. 6-(c), maintaining the fidelity of the pristine lattice. The output Wigner function continues to take negative values, with a peak reduction of 14.1%, proving that teleportation in the topological system robustly preserves the quantum coherence of the input state. In contrast, teleportation in the topologically trivial system rapidly deteriorates as disorder is added. Even for low levels of disorder, the average fidelity falls to 0.242, roughly half of that of the the pristine system, and even though the output function presents a local minimum at the origin, it does not take negative val-

ues. The drastic difference in the teleportation re-
sults between the topological and trivial systems is a consequence of topological protection of the phase of the squeezed quadrature. Transmission of the entangled two-mode state to the parties through a topological state ensures that Alice measures the maximally entangled variables, regardless of the magnitude of hopping disorder present in the lattice, resulting in robust preservation of the quantum coherence of the input state.
5 Final remarks
We have studied the propagation of squeezing and entanglement along a topological SSH waveguide array, focusing on the effects of the lattices topology in this phenomena. We found that topological ordering of the lattice robustly preserves the phase of the squeezed quadrature when propagating squeezed light through a topologically protected localized state, for both single- and twomode squeezed light. We also showed that the distribution of squeezing across the lattice inherits the spatial distribution of the localized state to which it is coupled, inheriting its topological protection as well. We discussed the interplay between entanglement, squeezing, and the phase of the squeezing; concluding that the topological phase of the lattice fixes the entangled variables. We finally provided a practical implementation of this system in a quantum teleportation protocol, where transmission of the entanglement resource to the parties through a topological lattice grants robustness and preservation of the quantum coherence of the teleported state.
We expect our findings on topological protec-

10

tion of squeezing to be of interest to any development in continuous variable quantum information, mainly as an alternative to protecting quantum coherence in photonic platforms. However, exploitation of topological phenomena in quantum optic systems, in particular continuous variable ones, is only recent, and its full possibilities are yet to be discovered. Our research is based on the SSH lattice, whose topological phase is broken by onsite disorder, which is always present to some extent in realistic devices; and being a one-dimensional lattice, this system is particularly sensitive to Anderson localization. Thus, a natural interest arises in studying the behavior of quantum light in two-dimensional lattices, with propagating edge states which enjoy better topological protection.
6 Acknowledgments
We thank P. Solano for useful comments and suggestions. J.M.D. is supported by CONICYT Grant CONICYTPFCHA/MagísterNacional/2019-22200526. C.H-A. acknowledges support by CONICYTPAI grant N°77180003, FONDECYT grant N°11190078, and ANID - Millenium Science Inititive Program - ICN17_012. L.E.F.F.T. acknowledges the support of FONDECYT grant N° 1211038, the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics and the Simons Foundation.
References
[1] K. von Klitzing, G. Dorda, and M. Pepper, "New Method for High-Accuracy Determination of the Fine-Structure Constant Based on Quantized Hall Resistance," Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 494 (1980).
[2] D. J. Thouless, M. Kohmoto, M. P. Nightingale, and M. den Nijs, "Quantized Hall Conductance in a Two-Dimensional Periodic Potential," Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 405 (1982).
[3] F. D. M. Haldane, "Model for a Quantum Hall Effect without Landau Levels: Condensed-Matter Realization of the "Parity Anomaly"," Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2015 (1988).
[4] C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, "Quantum Spin

Hall Effect in Graphene," Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 226801 (2005).
[5] C. L. Kane and M. Z. Hasan, "Colloquium: Topological insulators," Rev. Mod. Phys 82, 3045 (2010).
[6] F. D. M. Haldane and S. Raghu, "Possible Realization of Directional Optical Waveguides in Photonic Crystals with Broken Time-Reversal Symmetry," Physical Review Letters 100, 013904 (2008).
[7] T. Ozawa, H. M. Price, A. Amo, N. Goldman, M. Hafezi, L. Lu, M. C. Rechtsman, D. Schuster, J. Simon, O. Zilberberg, and I. Carusotto, "Topological photonics," Reviews of Modern Physics 91, 015006 (2019).
[8] B.-Y. Xie, H.-F. Wang, X.-Y. Zhu, M.-H. Lu, Z. D. Wang, and Y.-F. Chen, "Photonics meets topology," Optics Express 26, 24531 (2018).
[9] L. Lu, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljaci, "Topological photonics," Nature Photonics 8, 821 (2014).
[10] S. D. Huber, "Topological mechanics," Nature Physics 12, 621 (2016).
[11] C. H. Lee, S. Imhof, C. Berger, F. Bayer, J. Brehm, L. W. Molenkamp, T. Kiessling, and R. Thomale, "Topolectrical Circuits," Communications Physics 1, 1 (2018).
[12] V. Peano, C. Brendel, M. Schmidt, and F. Marquardt, "Topological Phases of Sound and Light," Physical Review X 5, 031011 (2015).
[13] A. B. Khanikaev, R. Fleury, S. H. Mousavi, and A. Alù, "Topologically robust sound propagation in an angularmomentum-biased graphene-like resonator lattice," Nature Communications 6, 8260 (2015).
[14] X. Wang, H. Zhang, and X. Wang, "Topological Magnonics: A Paradigm for SpinWave Manipulation and Device Design," Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 024029 (2018),.
[15] M. Atala, M. Aidelsburger, J. T. Barreiro, D. Abanin, T. Kitagawa, E. Demler, and I. Bloch, "Direct measurement of the Zak phase in topological Bloch bands," Nature Physics 9, 795 (2013).
[16] N. Malkova, I. Hromada, X. Wang, G. Bryant, and Z. Chen, "Observation of optical Shockley-like surface states in pho-

11

tonic superlattices," Optics Letters 34, 1633 (2009).
[17] M. König, S. Wiedmann, C. Brüne, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, "Quantum Spin Hall Insulator State in HgTe Quantum Wells," Science 318, 766 (2007).
[18] M. Hafezi, E. A. Demler, M. D. Lukin, and J. M. Taylor, "Robust optical delay lines with topological protection," Nature Physics 7, 907 (2011).
[19] D. Hsieh, D. Qian, L. Wray, Y. Xia, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, "A topological Dirac insulator in a quantum spin Hall phase," Nature 452, 970 (2008).
[20] L. Lu, C. Fang, L. Fu, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljaci, "Symmetryprotected topological photonic crystal in three dimensions," Nature Physics 12, 337 (2016).
[21] M. Z. Hasan, S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, and S.-M. Huang, "Discovery of Weyl Fermion Semimetals and Topological Fermi Arc States," Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 8, 289 (2017).
[22] Y. Yang, Z. Gao, H. Xue, L. Zhang, M. He, Z. Yang, R. Singh, Y. Chong, B. Zhang, and H. Chen, "Realization of a three-dimensional photonic topological insulator," Nature 565, 622 (2019).
[23] G. Jotzu, M. Messer, R. Desbuquois, M. Lebrat, T. Uehlinger, D. Greif, and T. Esslinger, "Experimental realization of the topological Haldane model with ultracold fermions," Nature 515, 237 (2014).
[24] S. Raghu and F. D. M. Haldane, "Analogs of quantum-Hall-effect edge states in photonic crystals," Physical Review A 78, 033834 (2008).
[25] Z. Wang, Y. Chong, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljaci, "Observation of unidirectional backscattering-immune topological electromagnetic states," Nature 461, 772 (2009).
[26] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, "Topological insulators with inversion symmetry," Physical Review B 76, 045302 (2007).
[27] M. S. Rudner and N. H. Lindner, "Band structure engineering and non-equilibrium dynamics in Floquet topological insulators," Nature Reviews Physics 2, 229 (2020).

[28] F. Giustino, M. Bibes, J. H. Lee, F. Trier, R. Valentí, S. M. Winter, Y.-W. Son, L. Taillefer, C. Heil, A. I. Figueroa, B. Plaçais, Q. Wu, O. V. Yazyev, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, J. Nygård, P. Forn-Díaz, S. de Franceschi, L. E. F. Foa Torres, J. McIver, A. Kumar, T. Low, R. Galceran, S. O. Valenzuela, M. V. Costache, A. Manchon, E.-A. Kim, G. R. Schleder, A. Fazzio, and S. Roche, "The 2020 Quantum Materials Roadmap," Journal of Physics: Materials (2020), 10.1088/2515-7639/abb74e.
[29] M. C. Rechtsman, J. M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer, D. Podolsky, F. Dreisow, S. Nolte, M. Segev, and A. Szameit, "Photonic Floquet topological insulators," Nature 496, 196 (2013).
[30] L. E. F. Foa Torres, "Perspective on topological states of non-Hermitian lattices," Journal of Physics: Materials 3, 014002 (2019).
[31] S. Weimann, M. Kremer, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer, S. Nolte, K. G. Makris, M. Segev, M. Rechtsman, and A. Szameit, "Topologically protected bound states in photonic parity­time-symmetric crystals," Nature Materials 16, 433 (2017).
[32] A. Blanco-Redondo, "Topological Nanophotonics: Toward Robust Quantum Circuits," Proceedings of the IEEE 108, 837 (2020).
[33] T. Kitagawa, M. A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, M. S. Rudner, E. Berg, I. Kassal, A. AspuruGuzik, E. Demler, and A. G. White, "Observation of topologically protected bound states in photonic quantum walks," Nature Communications 3, 882 (2012).
[34] C. Chen, X. Ding, J. Qin, Y. He, Y.-H. Luo, M.-C. Chen, C. Liu, X.-L. Wang, W.J. Zhang, H. Li, L.-X. You, Z. Wang, D.W. Wang, B. C. Sanders, C.-Y. Lu, and J.-W. Pan, "Observation of Topologically Protected Edge States in a Photonic TwoDimensional Quantum Walk," Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 100502 (2018).
[35] S. Barik, A. Karasahin, C. Flower, T. Cai, H. Miyake, W. DeGottardi, M. Hafezi, and E. Waks, "A topological quantum optics interface," Science 359, 666 (2018).
[36] J.-L. Tambasco, G. Corrielli, R. J. Chapman, A. Crespi, O. Zilberberg, R. Osellame, and A. Peruzzo, "Quantum interference of topo-

12

logical states of light," Science Advances 4, eaat3187 (2018).
[37] S. Mittal, E. A. Goldschmidt, and M. Hafezi, "A topological source of quantum light," Nature 561, 502 (2018).
[38] A. Blanco-Redondo, B. Bell, D. Oren, B. J. Eggleton, and M. Segev, "Topological protection of biphoton states," Science 362, 568 (2018).
[39] M. C. Rechtsman, Y. Lumer, Y. Plotnik, A. Perez-Leija, A. Szameit, and M. Segev, "Topological protection of photonic path entanglement," Optica 3, 925 (2016).
[40] S. Mittal, V. V. Orre, and M. Hafezi, "Topologically robust transport of entangled photons in a 2D photonic system," Optics Express 24, 15631 (2016).
[41] M. Wang, C. Doyle, B. Bell, M. J. Collins, E. Magi, B. J. Eggleton, M. Segev, and A. Blanco-Redondo, "Topologically protected entangled photonic states," Nanophotonics 8, 1327 (2019).
[42] S. L. Braunstein and P. van Loock, "Quantum information with continuous variables," Reviews of Modern Physics 77, 513 (2005).
[43] D. Gottesman, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, "Encoding a qubit in an oscillator," Physical Review A 64, 012310 (2001).
[44] S. Lloyd and S. L. Braunstein, "Quantum Computation over Continuous Variables," Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1784 (1999).
[45] N. C. Menicucci, P. van Loock, M. Gu, C. Weedbrook, T. C. Ralph, and M. A. Nielsen, "Universal Quantum Computation with Continuous-Variable Cluster States," Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 110501 (2006).
[46] C. M. Caves, "Quantum-mechanical noise in an interferometer," Phys. Rev. D 23, 1693 (1981).
[47] J. Aasi and the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, "Enhanced sensitivity of the LIGO gravitational wave detector by using squeezed states of light," Nature Photonics 7, 613 (2013).

[48] M. V. Larsen, X. Guo, C. R. Breum, J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, and U. L. Andersen, "Deterministic generation of a twodimensional cluster state," Science 366, 369 (2019).
[49] S. L. Braunstein and H. J. Kimble, "Teleportation of Continuous Quantum Variables," Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 869 (1998).
[50] M. Yukawa, H. Benichi, and A. Furusawa, "High-fidelity continuous-variable quantum teleportation toward multistep quantum operations," Phys. Rev. A 77, 022314 (2008).
[51] J. E. Bourassa, R. N. Alexander, M. Vasmer, A. Patil, I. Tzitrin, T. Matsuura, D. Su, B. Q. Baragiola, S. Guha, G. Dauphinais, and e. al, "Blueprint for a Scalable Photonic Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computer," Quantum 5, 392 (2021).
[52] M. V. Larsen, C. Chamberland, K. Noh, J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen, and U. L. Andersen, A fault-tolerant continuousvariable measurement-based quantum computation architecture, _eprint: arxiv:2101.03014[quant-ph].
[53] H. Vahlbruch, M. Mehmet, S. Chelkowski, B. Hage, A. Franzen, N. Lastzka, S. Goßler, K. Danzmann, and R. Schnabel, "Observation of Squeezed Light with 10-dB QuantumNoise Reduction," Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 033602 (2008).
[54] F. Li, T. Li, and G. S. Agarwal, Experimental study of decoherence of the two-mode
squeezed vacuum state via second harmonic generation, _eprint: arxiv:2012.11839 [physics.optics]. [55] W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer, and A. J. Heeger, "Solitons in Polyacetylene," Physical Review Letters 42, 1698 (1979). [56] A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. R. Schrieffer, and W. P. Su, "Solitons in conducting polymers," Reviews of Modern Physics 60, 781 (1988). [57] R. Simon, "Peres-Horodecki Separability Criterion for Continuous Variable Systems," Physical Review Letters 84, 2726 (2000).

13

A Numerical simulation of propagation of squeezed states

In this section we detail how the propagation of squeezed states is realized by numerical simulation.
Our method relies on the fact that squeezed states are gaussian, and are therefore fully described
by their correlation matrix, which can be obtained from matrices N and M , defined by their matrix elements Nn,m = anam and Mn,m = anam . Thus the problem reduces to simulating the evolution of both matrices.
Let H^ be the hamiltonian operator of the system, so the annihilation operators an satisfy the Heisenberg equation

- i d an = dz

H^ , an

(22)

The solution to this equation is an(z) = U^ (t)an(0)U^ (t), with U^ (t) = exp(-iH^ z) the z evolution operator. We represent the hamiltonian operator in matrix form, under the basis of the annihilation operators of the waveguides an, as

H^ = anHn,mam .
n,m

(23)

Let Q be the matrix containing the eigenvectors of H in its columns, so QHQ = H~ , with H~ the
diagonal form of H, containing the propagation constant of each eigenmode. The z evolution operator is represented in matrix form by U = Q exp(-iH~ t)Q, and the z evolution of the waveguide operators
is

an(z) = Un,m(t)am(0)

(24)

m

We finally obtain the evolution of the N and M matrices, described by

Nn,m(z) = Un,k(t)Um,lNk,l(0) ,
k,l
Mn,m(z) = Un,k(t)Um,lMk,l(0) .
k,l

(25) (26)

B Extended results of section 2.2
In this section we present a more complete report of the results discussed in section 2.2 of the main text, that could help the reader follow the corresponding discussions. For all figures we have used  = 0.3, and  = 0.9.
In figure 7 we show one-mode squeezing along the propagation axis at waveguides 1, 2 and 4 of the topological lattice, and waveguides 1 and 2 of the impurity one. These results allow to envision the spatial distribution of single mode squeezing across the lattices.
In figure 8 we show two-mode squeezing along the propagation axis, measured between the edge waveguide and the first two waveguides that take part in the localized eigenmode, namely, waveguides 2 and 4 of the topological lattice, and waveguides 1 and 2 of the impurity one. This shows the effects of the phase relation between the modes on two-mode squeezing.

14

Figure 7: One-mode squeezing along the propagation axis, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Top, middle and bottom row shows one-mode squeezing for pristine, d = 0.6v hopping disorder, and d = 0.6v onsite disorder respectively, while left and right columns refer to the topological and impurity states respectively. The site at which the measurement is taken is indicated in the legend, which is valid for the whole column.
Figure 8: Two-mode squeezing along the propagation axis, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Top, middle and bottom row shows two-mode squeezing for pristine, d = 0.6v hopping disorder, and d = 0.6v onsite disorder respectively, while left and right columns refer to the topological and impurity states respectively. The site at which the measurement is taken is indicated in the legend, which is valid for the whole column.
C Movie 1: Caption
Evolution of the average Wigner function at the zero-th waveguide when the lattices are initially excited with single-mode squeezed state, as studied in section 2.2, with  = 0.3 and  = 0.9. Top, middle and bottom row refer to the pristine, hopping disordered (d = 0.6v), and onsite disordered (d = 0.6v) lattices respectively, while left and right columns refer to the topological, and impurity induced (topo-
15

logically trivial) states respectively. The bar at the bottom indicates the distance along the propagation axis z. When sublattice symmetry is preserved (pristine and hoping disorder) the maximally squeezed quadrature of the topological state is always X1 due to its zero-valued propagation constant, therefore the ellipse remains oriented as the initial state. In contrast, when the symmetry is broken (onsite disorder), the maximally squeezed quadrature differs between different random realizations, thus no squeezing is obtained when averaging over them. Because the impurity induced state does not present any symmetry protected properties, upon any type of disorder the maximally squeezed quadrature fluctuates between the different random realizations and no average squeezing is measured in either case.
16

