arXiv:2106.01320v1 [physics.gen-ph] 28 May 2021

Nonassociative geometry of nonholonomic phase spaces with star R-flux string deformations and (non) symmetric metrics
Sergiu I. Vacaru 
Physics Department, California State University at Fresno, Fresno, CA 93740, USA; and Dep. Theoretical Physics and Computer Modelling,
Yu. Fedkovych Chernivtsi National University, 101 Storozhynetska street, Chernivtsi, 58029, Ukraine
Elen Veli Veliev 
Department of Physics, Kocaeli University, 41380, Izmit, Turkey
Laureniu Bubuianu
SRTV - Studioul TVR Iai and University Appolonia, 2 Muzicii street, Iai, 700399, Romania
March 9, 2021
Abstract
We elaborate on nonassociative differential geometry of phase spaces endowed with nonholonomic (nonintegrable) distributions and frames, nonlinear and linear connections, symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics, and correspondingly adapted quasi-Hopf algebra structures. The approach is based on the concept of nonassociative star product introduced for describing closed strings moving in a constant R-flux background. Generalized Moyal-Weyl deformations are considered when, for nonassociative and noncommutative terms of star deformations, there are used nonholonomic frames (bases) instead of local partial derivatives. In such modified nonassociative and nonholonomic spacetimes and associated complex/ real phase spaces, the coefficients of geometric and physical objects depend both on base spacetime coordinates and conventional (co) fiber velocity/ momentum variables like in (non) commutative Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry. For nonassociative and (non) commutative phase spaces modelled as total spaces of (co) tangent bundles on Lorentz manifolds enabled with star products and nonholonomic frames, we consider associated nonlinear connection, N-connection, structures determining conventional horizontal and (co) vertical (for instance, 4+4) splitting of dimensions and N-adapted decompositions of fundamental geometric objects. There are defined and computed in abstract geometric and N-adapted coefficient forms the torsion, curvature and Ricci tensors. We extend certain methods of nonholonomic geometry in order to construct R-flux deformations of vacuum Einstein equations for the case of N-adapted linear connections and symmetric and nonsymmetric metric structures.
Keywords: nonassociative geometry; R-flux string background; nonlinear connections; nonholonomic star deformations; nonsymmetric metrics. email: sergiu.vacaru@gmail.com Address for post correspondence in 2020-2021 as a visitor senior researcher at YF CNU Ukraine is: Yu. Gagarin street, 37-3, Chernivtsi, Ukraine, 58008; authors' order reflects certain chronology of former and futures research programs and involves equal contributions in obtaining new results in this work email: elsen@kocaeli.edu.tr and elsenveli@hotmail.com email: laurentiu.bubuianu@tvr.ro
1

Contents

1 Introduction, motivations and goals

3

1.1 Why nonassociative theories should be formulated in nonholonomic variables? . . . . . . . . . 4

1.2 On theories with nonsymmetric metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

1.3 Nonassociative gravity and Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

2 Nonassociative nonholonomic star products on (co) tangent Lorentz bundles

9

2.1 Geometric preliminaries: Nonlinear connections in commutative spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.2 Nonassociative star product and N­connection structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.2.1 The universal N-adapted R-matrix and the associator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.2.2 Nonholonomic star scalars and the Leibniz rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

2.3 Nonassociativity, N-connections, and quasi-Hopf algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

2.4 The star product on nonholonomic phase spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

2.4.1 Momentum like nonholonomic variables on phase spaces with complex cofibers . . . . 21

2.4.2 Nonholonomic star commuting scalars and d-vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

2.4.3 Star pairing between d-vectors and d-forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

2.5 The nonassociative star d-tensor calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

2.5.1 N-adapted Lie-derivatives of star scalars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

2.5.2 Nonholonomic star Lie derivatives of d-vectors and d-covectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

2.5.3 Star Lie N-adapted derivatives and d-tensor products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

2.6 Forms and d-tensors for quasi-Hopf N-adapted structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

2.6.1 Nonassociative deformations of star exterior products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

2.6.2 d-tensor and quasi-Hopf star deformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

3 Nonassociative differential geometry with N-connections & nonsymmetric metrics

31

3.1 Nonassociative linear connections and d­connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3.1.1 Covariant derivatives with d-connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3.1.2 N-adapted linear connections and quasi-Hopf structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

3.2 Star generalizations of the torsion, Riemann and Ricci d-tensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

3.2.1 Definition of d-torsions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

3.2.2 Riemann (curvature) d-tensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

3.2.3 Star deformed curvature of quasi-Hopf N-adapted structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

3.2.4 Star deformed Ricci d-tensors without and with quasi-Hopf structure . . . . . . . . . . 42

3.3 (Non) symmetric star deformed d-metrics and quasi-Hopf structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

3.3.1 The geometry of phase space commutative metrics and canonical d-connections . . . . 44

3.3.2 Nonassociative Levi Civita connections and canonical d-connections . . . . . . . . . . 46

4 Nonassociative nonholonomic vacuum Einstein equations

55

4.1 Nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations with nonsymmetric metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

4.2 Nonassociative vacuum gravitational equations in hc-variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

4.3 Parametric decomposition of nonassociative vacuum gravitational equations . . . . . . . . . . 59

4.4 Horizontal N-adapted projections and lifts of nonassociative Ricci d-tensors . . . . . . . . . . 60

4.5 First order nonassociative nonholonomic corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

5 Summary of results and conclusions

63

2

1 Introduction, motivations and goals
We initialize a research on nonassociative nonholonomic geometry induced by R-flux backgrounds in string gravity and classical and quantum models on phase spaces modelled as (co) tangent Lorentz bundles endowed with nonholonomic (non-integrable, equivalently, anholonomic) structures and nonsymmetric metrics. Such a nonholonomic geometric formalism was elaborated for various types of (non) commutative gravity and matter field theories, modified (relativistic) geometric flows, and classical and quantum information theories, see details in a series of our previous works [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] and references therein. In this article, nonassociative geometric and physical models are formulated in a form which is accessible to researchers in particle physics and modern cosmology. There are provided nonholonomic generalizations of two recent models of nonassociative geometry and vacuum gravity due to [12] and, with more formalized mathematical constructions involving quasi­Hopf algebraic structures, [13]. Such works on nonassociative geometry and gravity involve symmetric and nonsymmetric generic off-diagonal metrics, generalized connections, and systems of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations, PDEs, with small parameters and complex momentum variables.
We focus on nonholonomic geometric methods which are used in our partner works for investigating nonassociative gravitational theories with (effective) matter sources and matter fields equations. Such physically important systems of nonlinear PDEs can be written in nonholonomic dyadic variables, with distortions of connections, and which allow general decoupling and constructing exact and parametric solutions. For instance, we can consider nonassociative generalizations of the Einstein-Eisenhart-Moffat gravity with nonsymmetric metrics [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. Here we note that it was possible to elaborate also on nonassociative generalizations of the geometry of nonholonomic (co) tangent bundles for commutative Einstein-Finsler-Lagrange gravity with nonsymmetric metrics and their flows [22, 23, 24] and to extend the results for noncommutative gravity and geometric flow theories [1, 2, 25, 5]. Such geometric and physical models with nonholonomic and/or Finsler-Hamilton-Lagrange variables in string and modified gravity and phase space theories were studied in [8, 9, 6, 7] and references therein. This work provides a generalized nonassociative and nonholonomic quasi-Hopf formalism which is used in our partner works for developing new geometric and analytic methods for finding new classes of exact and parametric black hole and cosmological solutions in nonassociative gravity theories, see [2, 3, 5, 6, 7] for results in commutative and noncommutative modified gravity theories, MGTs, and nonholonomic geometry. The nonassociative nonholonomic geometric methods are used also for constructing certain models of nonassociative geometric flows when there are considered possible implications in quantum information theory, nonassociative and noncommutative locally anisotropic string gravity and MGTs and quantum deformation models as extensions of [26, 27, 5, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32].
Noncommutativity and nonassociativity appear in quite natural ways in string theory and various modifications of (quantum) gravity and quantum field theories. For open strings, such structures are present due to a non-vanishing background 2-form in the world volume of a D-brane. In closed string theory, the existence of non-commutative/ -associative structures can be a consequence of flux compactification with non-trivial three-form and related non-geometric backgrounds1. Evidences for such structures and various alternative approaches to noncommutative geometric flows, noncommutative and nonassociative gravity and gauge theories, membranes and double field theory, etc. were studied in [1, 2, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41] and references therein2. Such geometric constructions can be re-defined for models with quasi-Hopf algebras developed in mathematical form [42, 43, 13], see also some important previous works [37, 44]. In both cases (with or without quasi-Hopf structures, see respectively, [13] or [12]), certain self-consistent approaches to nonassociative gravity were formulated up to a level where a metric and a linear connection have been introduced and respective torsion, Riemann and Ricci tensors were defined and computed. The first problem is that in
1The term "non-geometric" is largely used in literature on string theory. Nevertheless, we show in this work that at least a formal geometrization of such models is possible using nonholonomic distributions and N-adapted star deformations.
2we cite here a series of papers which are most related to the purposes of this article and related partner works; we do not attempt to review the subjects and provide a comprehensive list of references
3

such theories a star metric generically does not satisfy typical relations for pulling up/ down indices. For linear connections, there is a second both conceptual and technical problem: how to adapt self-consistently the nonassociative metric and connection structure? To solve such issues a new type composition [44] was employed in order to define an nonassociative analogous Levi-Civita, LC, connection. Certain theories with different type Moyal-Weyl star product were elaborated for noncommutative/ nonassociative gravity theories and deformation quantization [1, 2, 28, 29, 45, 46, 47, 48]. They correspond to different types of nonholonomic distributions and deformations of geometric and physical objects defined on respective phase spaces.
1.1 Why nonassociative theories should be formulated in nonholonomic variables?
This article generalizes the approaches toward to the theory of nonassociative gravity from [12, 13] to a formalism when the geometric constructions are performed in nonholonomic forms. This allows us to work on the entire phase space and formulate nonassociative gravitational field equations using nonholonomic geometric methods developed and outlined in [23, 2, 8, 9]. In our partner works, we elaborate on geometric and analytic methods for constructing exact and parametric solutions of nonassociative modified Einstein equations and (generalized) geometric flow evolution equations. Such nonholonomic / noncommutative / supersymmetric etc. geometric techniques (called the anholonomic frame and connection deformation method, AFCDM; in our previous works we wrote in brief AFDM) of constructing exact solutions in (non) commutative/ supersymmetric/ string / massive and other type gravity theories was developed in [8, 9, 6, 7], see also references therein. The main idea of the AFCDM is to define certain classes of frame, metric, and (auxiliary) nonlinear and linear connection structures which allow us to decouple and integrate in very general forms various types of physically important nonlinear systems of PDEs.
In a series of works with applications of our (non) associative nonholonomic geometric formalism, we consider certain classes of nonassociatve geometric flow and/or gravitational and matter field equations which can be modelled also as nonholonomic Ricci soliton structures. The geometric constructions involve a canonical distinguished connection, d-connection, which is metric compatible and defined by the symmetric and nonsymmetric parts of metric (in N-adapted form, it is called a d-metric). There are also associated canonical nonassociative and/or nonsymmetric distortions of canonical d-connections3. Such spaces contain certain nonholonomically induced torsion structures, with N-adapted or coordinate frame components determined by generic off-diagonal terms of metrics and anholonomy coefficients. For the canonical d-connections (with respective nonholonomic diadic decompositions in spaces of higher dimensions than four, for a conventional splitting of dimensions in as 2+2+2+...), various physically important and associated systems of nonlinear PDEs can be decoupled and integrated in certain general forms. Resulting generic off-diagonal metrics4 and generalized connections are with coefficients determined by generating functions and (effective) generating sources, integration functions and constants. Such geometric objects are subjected to corresponding nonholonomic conditions defining commutative / noncommutative / nonassociative / supersymmetric / spinor and other type structures. For some classes of solutions, the coefficients of nonsymmetric metrics (which may be complex or real) are subjected to nonholonomic constraints, or related dynamically to nonsymmetric coefficients of a Ricci d-tensor which for nonholonomic configurations can be also nonsymmetric.
It should be emphasized that it is not possible to prove a general decoupling property for equations involving directly the Levi-Civita connection, LC-connection, because the zero-torsion conditions for this connection contract and mix the indices in related tensor values (for instance, in the Ricci d-tensor). Decoupling of such systems of nonlinear PDEs is possible only for some canonical deformations of linear connections, determined by the same metric structure, encoding nonholonomic and star product deformations of Einstein equations
3we say that some geometric objects are distinguished, d-objects, for instance, d-vectors, d-tensors etc. if they are adapted to a prescribed nonholonomic structure, which can be nonassociative, noncommutative, with nontrivial nonlinear connection, N-connection structure; in next section, we provide basic definitions and proofs and necessary references
4which can not be diagonalized in a finite spactime/ phase space region by coordinate transforms; nonsymmetric metrics can be decomposed in respective symmetric and anti-symmetric parts
4

and various modifications. For well­defined auxiliary and/or additional constraints on already constructed general classes of solutions, it is possible at the end to extract large subclasses of solutions with zero torsion configurations. To eliminate completely the torsion structure is not always possible in certain noncommutative / nonassociative models of geometric flows, string gravity etc. if the (non) linear connection formalism is elaborated directly on the total phase space and not for the lifts of geometric objects and equations with decoupling on a base manifold.
We note that the AFCDM was formulated also as a geometric method for constructing exact and parametric generic off-diagonal solutions (in general, with nontrivial nonlinear connection, N-connection, structure) in general relativity, GR, and various modified commutative and noncommutative Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton like theories [4, 3].5 We proved that Finsler like d-connections and adapted to N-connection distinguished geometric objects and metrics (respectively, d-objects and d-metrics) can be introduced also in the GR theory. Such nonholonomic formulations can be alternative or equivalent to standard approaches with the LC-connection. They allowed to construct various classes of generic off-diagonal solutions of nonholonomically deformed Einstein equations with possible constraints to zero torsion configurations.
1.2 On theories with nonsymmetric metrics
Nonassociative star product deformations of GR and certain quantum deformation theories are formulated as complex geometric models with nonsymmetric metrics [12, 13, 30, 31, 28, 25, 4, 3]. Such constructions were studied in string gravity or other type (non) commutative MGTs. For real manifolds and tangent bundles, nonsymmetric gravity theories were formulated in some variants [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] with variational and geometric proofs of fundamental field equations and when applications in modern astrophysics and cosmology [49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 22] were analyzed. These series of works define some directions of research in mathematical and nonstandard particle physics and MGTs with nonsymmetric metrics. Here we cite also [23, 24] and references therein on nonsymmetric Ricci flows and Lagrange­Finsler geometry.
Let us summarize and discuss most important results on elaborating geometric and physical models with nonsymmetric real metrics. Such works motivate our research program on nonassociative geometric evolution flows and gravity theories with applications, and quantum information theories when the generalized metrics can be with complex components and nonholonomic deformation structures are involved:
a. There were studied examples of nonholonomic (non) commutative geometric flow and gravity theories with nonsymmetric metrics and generalized connections formulated on generalized phase spaces endowed with nonholonomic structures [25, 24, 2, 3, 4]. Those geometric constructions can be naturally extended for nonassociative geometric models on complex phase spaces [12, 13]. It should be emphasized here that none physical principle prohibits us to elaborate on such theories with nonsymmetric metrics. We can always decompose an nonsymmetric metric into skew-symmetric and symmetric parts and consider respective star deformations in order to elaborate certain classes of commutative / noncommutative / supersymmetric metric­affine and generalized Finsler­Lagrange-Hamilton geometries, theories of (locally anisotropic, classical, or quantum) matter fields and gravitational interactions, and Ricci flow theories.
b. A. Einstein attempted to unify gravity with electromagnetism [14] in a model when the nonsymmetric part of metric had been identified with the electromagnetic field strength tensor. He elaborated also a unified theory of physical fields by introducing a complex metric field with Hermitian symmetry [15]. Here we note that nonassociative gravity theories [12, 13] also involve nonsymmetric metrics with complex terms but in certain forms determined by a star product related to contributions from string theory.
5Readers may consult references therein and the Introduction, Conclusion and Appendix B to [8], for a historical review and summary of more than 20 directions of research activity in different countries. Here we also motivate that we have to consider Finsler geometric variables because certain models of nonassociative gravity are formulated on phase spaces which involves dependence of geometric objects on velocity and/or momentum type coordinates, see additional motivations in section 1.3.
5

c. Then, L. P. Eisenhart studied generalized Riemannian spaces with nonsymmetric metrics when the symmetric part is non-degenerate [16, 17]. The so-called Eisenhart problem was to define various classes of linear connections which are compatible with a general (nonsymmetric) metric structure. There were analysed also some important particular solutions for symmetric and generic off-diagonal backgrounds with Riemannian and Finsler-Lagrange spaces, see [23] and references therein for a review of results and applications in modified gravity and cosmology theories. The geometric arena of nonassociative gravity [12, 13] involves generalized phase spaces as certain (co) tangent complex manifolds with complex nonsymmetric metrics and respective star products depending on velocity/momentum like variables. Such constructions can be defined also in so-called nonholonomic (non) commutative Finsler-LagrangeHamilton variables [4, 3, 8] which allow us to find exact solutions [2, 6, 5, 7] and perform deformation quantization [28, 30, 29, 31, 32].
d. After A. Einstein and L. P. Eisenhart fundamental works, a more than twenty years of research activity on elaborating principles and modern type physical theories with nonsymmetric metrics was due to J. Moffat and co­authors [18, 19, 20, 21, 49, 50, 51]. In this article we write in brief, NSGT, even NGT was also used in many previous papers (to avoid confusions with "noncommutative gravity theories"). Late versions of such models are free of ghosts, tachions and higher-order poles in the propagator in the linear approximation on Minkowski space. It was proven that expansions of the general nonsymmetric metric about an arbitrary Einstein background metric result in effective field equations involving terms which are first order in the skew-symmetric part of metric being free of coupling to un-physical (negative energy) modes. The solutions of such systems of PDEs have consistent asymptotic boundary conditions.
e. T. Janssen and T. Prokopec published a series of works [52, 53, 54, 55] devoted to cosmological implications and the problem of instabilities in gravity theories with nonsymmetric metrics. They agreed that there are viable models of NSGT with a nonzero mass term for the nonsymmetric part of metric, see classical and quantum variants in [49, 50, 51, 21]. Such a term can be treated as an absolutely symmetric torsion induced by an effective B­field like in string gravity but in four dimensions. Recently, such nonholonomic string gravity models were studied in [5]. An important result was that even, for a GR background, a small B­field for the nonsymmetric part may quickly grow other fields. The theory can be stabilized by introducing extra Lagrange multipliers and finding solutions when the unstable modes dynamically vanish. That solved also the problems formally created by absence of gauge invariance found by Damour, Deser and McCarthy [56]. Nevertheless, the general conclusion of Janssen and Prokopec works was that instabilities in NSGTs should not be seen as a relic of a linearized theory with nonsymmetric metrics and associated tensor fields. They found that certain nonlinear configurations with a nontrivial Einstein background (for instance, on a Schwarzschild spacetime) are positively unstable.
f. The idea to use Lagrange multipliers and dynamical constraints in order to solve certain instability problems in NSGTs [49, 50, 51, 21] contains already a relation to the nonholonomic geometry and classical and quantum field dynamics with imposed non-integrable conditions. Such a nonholonomic and almost symplectic geometric approach to theories with nonsymmetric metrics was studied in a series of works [22, 23, 24]. We proved that the Einstein gravity theory can be reformulated in almost Kähler (nonsymmetric) variables with an effective symplectic form and compatible linear connections uniquely defined by a (pseudo) Riemannian metric following certain well­defined geometric principles. A large class of NSGTs can be formulated on manifolds enabled with nonholonomic distributions (i.e. nonholonomic manifolds) and their (co) tangent bundles. There were analyzed the conditions when the fundamental geometric and physical objects defined by (non) symmetric metrics are determined by nonholonomic deformations in GR or by contributions from Ricci flow theory, or a quantum gravity model. We had shown how to impose certain classes of nonholonomic constraints generating effective Lagrangians for a NSGTs which do not develop instabilities. It was elaborated also a linearization formalism for such anholonomic nonsymmetric geometric flow and gravity theories and analyzed the stability of stationary
6

ellipsoidal solutions defining certain classes of nonholonomic and/or nonsymmetric deformations of the Schwarzschild metric. Finally, we concluded that instabilities do not consist a general feature of NSGTs but a particular property of certain models and/or classes of unconstrained solutions. For geometric flows of nonsymmetric metrics, the existence of singularities is a general property at least for the symmetric part, but we can always elaborate on procedures of eliminating singularities and stabilization imposing respective types of nonholonomic constraints and deformation of geometric objects.
We note that there exists the so­called generality problem in NSGTs when certain guiding principles have to be formulated in order to select from nine and more constants and extra terms in generalized Lagrangians. J. Moffat's group considered at least 11 undetermined parameters which come from the full theory and the decomposition of a nonsymmetric metric tensor [18, 19, 20, 21, 49, 50, 51]. In our works, we exploited the idea that (non) symmetric corrections to metrics and connections can be derived following certain geometric principles in nonholonomic Ricci flow and/or deformation quantization theories [22, 23, 24].

1.3 Nonassociative gravity and Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry
We present here a series of important geometric and physical arguments motivating our approach to nonassociative geometry and modifications of gravity and particle physics theories formulated as a synthesis of nonholonomic and Finsler like geometric methods with the star product techniques:

1. The nonassociativity for a constant R-flux background is determined by certain commutation relations for a quasi-Poisson coordinate algebra

[xi, xj] =

ils4 3

Rij

apa,

[xi, pa] = i

ai

and [pa, pb] = 0,

(1)

for (x, p) = (xi, pa), with physical constants ls, and Rija being antisymmetric and when all indices are (are) fiber type ones; where, for the complex unity, i2 = -1 (one should not confuse with a horizontal index); and when xi and pa denote respective spacetime coordinates and momentum variables on a phase space T V (modelled as a cotangent bundle, for instance, to a Lorentz manifold V ).6 Commutation rules
(1) together with other type nonholonomic constraints (there are used equivalent terms like anholonomic,
i.e. non-integrable) are defined by respective distributions of geometric objects on tangent bundle T V, with local coordinates (x, y) = (xi, ya), and its dual T V, see more evidence in [1, 2, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39].

2. For elaborating particle physics models with nonassociative/noncommutative variable, respective nonholonomic distributions are determined by modified dispersion relations, MDRs, when locally

c2-p 2 - E2 + c4m2 = (E, -p , m; ls),

(2)

for an indicator of modifications (xk, E, -p , m; time coordinates xi and momenta pa = (-p , E)

ls). with

In general, an energy

such an indicator depends on spaceparameter E. Commutative theories

with MDRs can be formulated in an axiomatic relativistic Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton form [8, 9]. Such

models encode possible violations of local Lorentz invariance, LIV, or can be restricted to constructions

on Lorentz manifolds. Formula (2) can be generalized by introducing noncommutative/nonassociative

variables and respective parameters defining such theories (for instance, considering nonassociative star

product deformations, see next sections). Geometrically, we work with corresponding classes of non-

holonomic distributions on T V when, for instance, metrics gij(xk, pa) depend both on spacetime and

6In above formulas coordinate indices run values i, j, ... = 1, 2, ...n and a = n + 1, n + 2, ..., n + n. In order to contract an index i, j, ... with a respective a, b, ... we should express a = n + i, b = n + j, ... and then summarize correspondingly on some up-low repeating i, j, ..

7

momentum type coordinates, and certain star product deformations (see rigorous geometric definitions in the next section). Nonlinear metric structures (for instance, written in the form gij(xk, yl)) are considered, in Lagrange geometry defined on T V and, imposing homogeneity conditions on fiber coordinates yl, in Finsler geometry. For various types of geometric and physical models, star product deformations on total bundle spaces, their dual, and/or projections on base manifolds, can be constructed.
3. A special class of canonical d-connections (Finsler like ones being metric compatible but not with homogeneity conditions) allows to decouple and integrate in general form the gravitational and (effective) matter field equations various types of MGTs and GR, [8, 9, 6, 7]. For four dimensional, 4-d, spacetime manifolds,conventional 2+2 splitting determined by a nonlinear connection, N-connection, structure allow to find exact solutions (with generic off-diagonal metrics when coefficients depend on all spacetime coordinates) of physically important systems of nonlinear PDEs. In this series of partner works (see, for instance, the second partner work [57] and further ones), we prove that such geometric methods can be extended to nonassociative gravity theories. When nonholonomic geometric constructions are performed on generalized phase spaces, for instance, of total dimension 8, the approach is developed with a nonholonomic shell diadic splitting, s-splitting, of dimensions (2+2+2+2) determined by respective s-connection and s-metric structures. This defines geometrically the AFCDM for generating exact and parametric solutions in noncommutative Finsler and gauge like gravity theories [2, 3, 6]. As explicit examples, we can construct modified black hole and cosmological solutions and all geometric formalism can be extended to nonassociative gravity following methods of nonholonomic geometry and the theory of nonlinear PDEs.
4. Rewriting commutative and noncommutative gravity theories in Finsler like variables, it is possible to define canonical almost symplectic geometries and perform models of deformation, A-brane and gauge like quantization [30, 31, 32]. We expect that such methods can be generalized for respective star products in nonassociative gravity and even in the A. Connes approach to noncommutative geometry [25] and further nonassociative extensions.
5. Using the results on AFCDMs in constructing new classes of exact solution in heterotic string gravity theories [5], there are possibilities to investigate the problem how a nonassociative gravity based on the concept of star diffeomorphism can be related self-consistently with a string or double field theory and to find exact and parametric solutions in such scenarios. Here we note that J. Moffat's group elaborated their nonsymmetric gravity theories following a paradigm that MGTs should be elaborated for 4-d generalized spacetime geometries and not for (super) string gravities with extra dimensions. Considering models of string gravity on higher order (co) tangent bundles and respective (non) associative / commutative geometric objects [26, 27, 58, 8], we can formulate an unified geometric formalism for all type of such theories even the arenas for constructions and physical principles can be very different. For instance, we can use nonholonomic deformations of 4-d Lorentz manifolds, their (co) tangent bundles, or 10-d and 11-d spacetimes, correspondingly, in string gravity and supergravity etc. and respective nonassociative models.
6. Nonholonomic constraints on geometric flow evolution of (pseudo) Riemannian metrics naturally result in nonsymmetric metric components and generalized nonlinear and linear connection structures, see reviews of results in [23, 8]. Such configurations can be described in Finsler­Lagrange and/or almost Kähler variables. The constructions can be extended on complex and real (co) tangent bundles for nonassociative phase space geometries and respective models of nonassociative and/or noncommutative Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry. For self-similar configurations, we obtain nonholonomic Ricci solitons with nonassociataive star products providing certain modifications of the Einstein equations for geometric objects defined in [12, 13].
8

7. Finally, we note that nonholonomic generalized Finsler methods are important for developing in a series of partner works certain models of nonassociative and noncommutative quantum information theories and geometric flows.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains an introduction into the geometry of nonassociative star products and nonholonomic (co) tangent Lorentz bundles. In geometric preliminaries, we define nonlinear connections, N-connections, and N-adapted frames and related nonholonomic horizontal, h, and vertical,v, or covertical, c, decompositions (hand v- or c-decompositions) for associative and commutative base Lorentz manifolds and nonholonomic phase spaces. The formulas for nonassociative star products are considered in N-adapted and coordinate base forms on nonholonomic phase spaces with real and complex momentum like variables. We study properties of the star product and develop on a nonholonomically generalized star tensor calculus and Lie derivatives. In section 3, there are formulated and compared two approaches (without and with quasi-Hopf N-adapted structure) to nonassociative nonholonomic differential geometry. There are defined nonassociative distinguished connections, d-connections, and covariant derivatives with N-adapted h- and c-splitting and computed their Riemannian, torsion and Ricci d-tensors. There are analyzed main features of star deformed nonsymmetric and symmetric metrics studied in N-adapted frame bases and related nonassociative variants of canonical distinguished and Levi-Civita, LC, connections. Section 4 is devoted to nonassociative nonholonomic modifications of vacuum Einstein equations, in general, with nontrivial cosmological constant. For nontrivial R-fluxes, such models involve both symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics. In canonical nonholonomic variables, the nonsymmetric components of Ricci tensors can be related to parametric decompositions of the nonsymmetric part of metrics. There are computed nontrivial R-flux contributions to horizontal components of the Ricci tensor depending both on spacetime and momentum like variables. We speculate how to formulate nonassociative variants of vacuum Einstein equations with a nontrivial cosmological constant using star nonholonomic deformations. The main issue is that such constructions involve nonsymmetric complex metric structures and related types of N- and d-connections. We formulate such variants of nonassociative gravitational field equations when the nonsymmetric components of metrics are described by nonsymmetric d-tensor fields and argue that such equations can be decoupled and integrated in certain general forms using the AFCDM (proofs are given in our partner work [57]). Conclusions are drawn in section 5. In this paper, proofs are sketched in brief forms which are accessible both to mathematicians and physicists. We cite relevant papers containing similar associative geometric results and various details and examples. It is used the abstract (frame and coordinate free) geometric method but certain important coefficient N-adapted formulas are presented because they are useful for our future partner works.
2 Nonassociative nonholonomic star products on (co) tangent Lorentz
bundles
A self-consistent approach to nonassociative gravity was elaborated in [12] for respective star products and star diffeomorphisms on a configuration space M with local coordinates (xj) and coordinate frames. In that work, there are considered also geometric constructions on full phase space M = T M, with local coordinates of type (xk, ipa), which is a dual tangent bundle with (co) fiber momentum like coordinates ipa multiplied to the complex unity, i2 = -1, see footnotes below on conventions on coordinates and indices. It is speculated on formulating a variational calculus for star diffeomorphism invariant of the Einstein-Hilbert action with embedding of configuration space into the phase space as the p0 leaf. Then, a more rigorous mathematical model of nonassociative geometry and gravity with quasi-Hopf algebraic structures was developed in [13]. In this paper, we extend and modify those geometric approaches in nonholonomic geometric forms which allows us to formulate certain variants of nonassociative vacuum gravitational field equations with nonsymmetric
9

metrics, see section 4. Using such a formalism, we construct exact solutions in nonassociative gravity and consider possible applications in modern cosmology, astrophysics and (quantum) information theory in a series of partner works, see reviews of previous results for (non) commutative geometric and physical models in [3, 11, 6, 7], and the second partner work [57] on decoupling and integrability of nonassociative vacuum gravitational equations.
In [8, 9], a study of physical principles and axiomatic approaches to (non) commutative MGTs with MDRs and LIVs of type (2) and possible generalizations to models with nonsymmetric metrics is provided. It was emphasized that a subclass of nonstandard physical models of Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton type can be formulated as causal extensions of GR and standard particle theories of physics if certain canonical nonholonomic variables are used for geometric constructions performed on tangent and cotangent Lorentz bundles, respectively, T V and T V. Such total (phase) spaces can be modelled on a Lorentz manifold V (base spacetime). A similar geometric techniques can be applied for constructing exact and parametric solutions in GR when a base spacetime V is modeled as a four dimensional, 4-d, nonholonomic Lorentz manifold enabled with a pseudoRiemannian metric structure gij(xk) (for i, j, k, ... = 1, 2, 3, 4; for instance, of local signature (+ + +-)), and certain classes of nonholonomic distributions with respect to which geometric objects can be adapted.7 We can always introduce some type of nonholonomic variables on T V and T V and formulate various geometric and physical theories on such phase spaces as certain relativistic Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometries which can be generalized to complex variables, for nonassociative and/or noncommutative spaces, supersymmetric models etc. To formulate such theories in Finsler like variables (they can be introduced even in GR) is important because they allow a straightforward reformulation in almost symplectic variables which can be used for performing deformation, A-brane and gauge like quantization [28, 29, 31, 1, 2, 25]. Similar higher dimension constructions were considered for the heterotic string gravity in [5, 26, 27].
In this section, we provide basic definitions and results on N-connection geometry with nonhlonomic hand v-/c-splitting of type 4+4 on T V and T V , which are necessary for developing the anholonomic frame and connection deformation method, AFCDM, for constructing exact and parametric solutions in nonassociative gravity [8, 6, 7, 11]. Then, we study certain important properties of nonassociative star products adapted to corresponding nonlinear connection splitting and state that there are two important operators which, respectively, control when the product is noncommutative and nonassociative. To perform a nonholonomic generalization of nonassociative gravity models from [12, 13] we consider phase spaces with complexified momentum type variables of T V.

2.1 Geometric preliminaries: Nonlinear connections in commutative spaces
We summarize main concepts and definitions from nonholonomic geometry of relativistic phase spaces with real spacetime and complex velocity/momentum type variables. For convenience, there will be provided some important formulas with real and complex (co) fiber coordinates:

u = (x, p) = { u = (uk = xk, pa = (i )-1pa)} on T V, and

(3)

u = (x, p) = { u = (uk = xk, pa = pa)} on T V.

This defines a phase space model T V with complex cofibers associated to a real cotangent bundle T V. Such

notations

are

different

from

those

introduced

for

formula

(3.1)

in

[12],

where

XK

=

(

pk i

,

xk

)

is

written

instead

of u.8 In this work, an up (or low, on convenience), label " " is used in order to distinguish such total

7On total (phase) spaces of dimension 8, the coefficients of geometric objects (metrics, connections, curvatures etc.) depend both on base and (fiber) coordinates. For instance, we consider theories when a metric structure g(xk, va), or g(xk, pa), is
determined by MDRs in some forms depending additionally on velocity/ momentum like (co) fiber coordinates, when indices
 = (i, a),  = (j, b) etc. run values 1, 2, ..., 7, 8. Such MDRs and commutation relations (1) also determine a class of frames which are linear with respect to coefficients of a nonlinear connection (N-connection) structure N = {Nia} and/or N = { Nia}, see definitions below.
8 = h/2 is the Planck constant

10

"momentum-complexified" coordinates from real ones u = (xk, pa) on T V considered in Finsler-LagrangeHamilton geometry [8, 9].

Nonlinear connection structures on commutative phase spaces: Nonlinear connection, N­connection, structures on T V, T V and T V can be defined in global forms by
respective Whitney sums  of conventional horizontal and vertical distributions, h- and v­distributions, and horizontal and covertical distributions, h and c­distributions, when

N : T TV = hT V  vT V, N : T TV = hT V  cvT V and N : T TV = hT V  cvT V. (4)

For a Lorentz base manifold, V, such a N­connection splitting is with a 4 + 4 decomposition of the total space dimension. In local forms, the formulas (4) are written respectively:

N

=

Nia

 va



dxi,

N=

Nia

 pa



dxi

and

N=

Nia 

 pa



dxi,

with corresponding N-connection coefficients N = {Nia}, N = { Nia}, and N = { Nia}, for i, j, k, ... = 1, 2, 3, 4 (used for base coordinates) and a, b, c, ... = 5, 6, 7, 8 (used for (co) fiber coordinates). The spacetime and phase spaces and respective geometric objects on V, T V, T V, TV are labeled by "bold face" symbols if they are enabled with a N-connection structures and/or written in N-adapted form. An up, or law (on convenience), label bar " " is used in order to emphasize that certain geometric objects are defined on cotangent bundles and, respectively, labels with a double bar " " for geometric objects on full phase spaces with co-vertical coordinates containing the complex unity before momenta.

N-adapted commutative (co) frame structures: If a N-connection structure (4) is introduced for a real tangent Lorentz bundle, we can define respective
classes of N-elongated (equivalently, N-adapted) bases and dual bases (cobases), which are linear on Nconnection coefficients and written in the form:

e

=

(ei

=

 xi

-

Nia

(x,

v)

 va

,

eb

=

b

=

 vb

),

on

T TV;

(5)

e = (ei = dxi, ea = dva + Nia(x, v)dxi), on T TV.

A local basis e is nonholonomic if the commutators

e[e] := ee - ee = w(u)e

(6)

contain nontrivial anholonomy coefficients w = {wiba = aNib, wjai = ejNia - eiNja}. If w = 0, such a basis is holonomic (integrable) and can be transformed via coordinate transforms into a coordinated basis, e   = /u. Nonholonomic frames and coframes of type (5) are considered in Einstein and FinslerLagrange geometry and gravity theories [8, 9] with respective 2+2 or 4+4 splitting. For Finsler variables, there are imposed certain homogeneity conditions on velocity type fiber variables. In principle, we can consider models with complex velocity type variables, but such constructions are not largely used in modern mathematical and theoretical particle physics.
Similarly, we can define N-elongated dual bases and cobases for cotangent bundles,

e

=

(

ei =

 xi

-

Nia(x,

p)

 pa

,

eb

=

 pb

),

on

T TV;

(7)

e = ( ei = dxi, ea = dpa + Nia(x, p)dxi), on T TV,

which, in general, are characterized by anholonomy coefficients

w = { wiba = ea Nib, wjia = ej Nia - ei Nja}.

(8)

11

For a N­connection on TV, or TV, we can introduce and compute corresponding coefficients of N­connection curvature (called also Neijenhuis tensors)

aij =

Nia xj

-

Nja xi

+

Nib

Nja vb

-

Njb

Nia vb

,

or

ija

=

 Nia xj

-

 Nja xi

+

Nib



Nj pb

a

-

Njb

 Nia pb

.

(9)

Such curvatures are different from the Riemannian curvature for linear connections. In brief, we shall write
also i := /xi, b := /pb,  := (i, a),  := (i, a) etc. Formulas (7), (8) and (9) can be generalized on a (complex) phase space T V for

e

=

(

ei

=

 xi

-

Nia(x,

p)  pa ,

eb =   pb ), on T TV;

(10)

e = ( ei = dxi, ea = d pa + Nia(x, p)dxi), on T TV.

Various versions of such N-adapted (N-elongated) nonholonomic bases (frames) and their frame transforms can be used for variables pa = pa = (i )-1pa and eb = / pb = i eb, in order to elaborate on generalizations of star products and respective nonassociative calculus, see below formulas (13). The coefficients of N-
connection N = { Nia} can be chosen in such forms that the N-adapted frames (10) are real bases even the cofiber coordinates contain the complex unity i, when i2 = -1.

General and N-adapted frame transforms in nonholonomic commutative phase spaces: On phase spaces T V and/or TV, we can consider arbitrary frame transforms from coordinate (holonomic)
bases and cobases, respectively, to nonholonomic ones, which is written in the form.

 = / u  e = e( u)  and e = d u  e = e( u ) e

(11)

where undrelined indices are used for objects with coefficients determined with respect to a coordinate local (co) base and matrices e and e are called vierbeinds. For (co) vector/tangent bundles, there is a natural local splitting of total space indices into h- and c-indices, for instance,  = (j, c),  = (j, c), u =
( x, p) = { u = (xk, pc)} etc. There is a subclass of so-called N-adapted frame transforms which are linear on N-connection coefficients and transform local coordinate (co) bases into N-adapted ones (10). They are parameterized in the form

e =

eii( u) - Nib eba( u)

0

eaa( u)

and e =

ejj( u) 0

Nkb ekk( u) eaa( u)

,

(12)

where e = e( u)  and e = e( u) e. We can consider N-adapted frame transforms of type
e = e ( u) e and e = e ( u) e, or any general (not obligatory N-adapted, i.e. without boldface symbols) e = e ( u) e and e = e ( u) e .
Because we work on a (co) tangent bundle, we have the possibility to contract not only horizontal (vertical) up with vertical (horizontal) low indices, for instance, AiBi (AaBa), but we can also introduce a convention how to contract horizontal indices with vertical ones, for instance, AiBn+i  AiBa, where dim V = n and the same dimension is taken for the (co) fiber coordinates. This convention is used for R-fluxes in string theory,
when such a rule in stated in the definition of star product (see next section). In the bulk of such works, the geometric objects and star products are defined for coordinate (co) bases,  and e, but the constructions became well defined geometrically only if a general covariance principle (when the geometric/physical models
do not depend on frame/coordinate transforms) is formulated. A self-consistent geometric approach has to be elaborated for general frames e and e for commutative phase spaces with possible star deformations to nonassociative ones on tensor products. A subclass of such N-adapted frames e and e will be defined in such a form which will allow certain general decoupling and integration of physically important systems of
nonlinear PDEs.

12

2.2 Nonassociative star product and N­connection structures
We extend the definition of nonassociative star product introduced and studied in [37, 44] to the case of nonholonomic phase spaces and spacetime manifolds enabled with N-connection structure. The approaches elaborated is section 2 of [12] and section 2 of [13] for configuration spaces can be developed for the case of trivial N-connection structure if we follow the geometric formalism outlined in previous subsection. In certain models of noncommutative gauge gravity and generalized Finsler geometry and their deformation quantization, similar N-adapted Moyal­Weyl star products were considered in [1, 2, 28, 29, 4, 3, 30, 32]. Our motivation to consider such general frame and N-adapted frame formulations is that the GR is a classical theory valid at the macroscopic level at least for astrophysical and not very long cosmological distances. The Einstein and matter field equations can be formulated in a general covariant form when necessary type frames and coordinates are used for constructing and analyzing properties of certain classes of solutions and modeling classical field interactions. A general formalism of quantum and string star deformations should not depend on the type of frames/ coordinates are used for the definition of the star product and respective quantum/ string corrections determined by Planck and/or string length scales. Such a geometrization is possible if we use general nonholonomic frames which can be with N-connection splitting for certain purposes to geometrize phase space constructions and/or solve systems of nonlinear PDEs. For instance, one of the aims is to consider some primary classical generic off-diagonal metrics and generalized connections and then elaborate on selfconsistent nonassociative and noncommutative modifications into certain classes of target solutions, which are covariant on commutative base manifolds but with star deformed symmetries and nonassociative geometric objects on the total phase space.
We begin with the definition of nonassociative star products in h-coordinates for h-coefficients in order to familiarize readers with nonholonomic modifications of coordinate frame constructions in [12, 37, 44]. In subsection 2.4, the formalism of nonassociative star product is developed in N­adapted form on the full phase space T V. Then (in further subsections), the constructions are adapted also to quasi-Hopf structures with N-connection splitting in order to elaborated on geometric models with star deformations of coordinate diffeomorphism.

2.2.1 The universal N-adapted R-matrix and the associator
In our works, the geometric and physical constructions are elaborated for general (co) frame structures both on base and phase (tangent and cotangent bundles) spaces, i.e. for some e and e and respective frame transforms (11). For a nontrivial N-connection structure, it is optimal to work with bases e and e (10) and respective vielbeinds (12).

Nonassociative N-adapted star product:
Let us consider a full phase space M containing a spacetime direction determined by a N-adapted direction ei and a momentum like cofiber directions eb as in (7). For any pair of functions z(x, p) and q(x, p), we define a N-adapted star product N :

z N q :=

·[FN-1(z, q)]

(13)

=

·[exp

-

1 2

i

(

ei 

ei -

ei 

ei)

+

i4s 12

Rija(pa

ei 

ej -

ej  pa ei)]z  q

=

z

·

q

-

i 2

[(

eiz)(

eiq) - (

eiz)(

eiq)]

+

i4s 6

Rijapa(

eiz)(

ejq) + . . . ,

where the constant  and totally antisymmetric Rija capture the presence of a flux background in string theory, with h- and v-indices contracted following the convention from footnote 6. In these formulas, the tensor product  is used in a form indicating on which factor of z  q the N-adapted derivatives act with

13

the dot form, when eventually the tensor products turn into usual multiplications. In coordinate frames and for holonomic frames determined by trivial N-connection structures, the star product (13) coincides with that considered in [12]. In such cases, we do not write boldface symbols and do not use the label "N" for star products an related geometric objects.
The properties of the twist distinguished operator, d-operator, F-1 (13) will be discussed bellow. It is important to decide on possible conventions on definition of nonassociative star products and constructing models of curved phase phases: In flat spaces, we can work always with partial derivatives  = (i, a) identifying indices for coordinates on base manifold with (co) fiber indices on (co) tangent bundle. In such cases, we can define the nonassociative star product as in formulas (2.1) and (2.2) of [12]. For curved base spaces enabled with generalized anholonomic (co) frames as commutative frame transforms of the partial derivatives and differentials and involving respective frame decompositions of the metric structure and certain covariant derivatives (and related nonlinear and linear connections), the constructions are not straightforward and depend on certain conventions on constructing respective nonassociative geometric and curved spacetime models. There are two possibilities:

· Convention 1: We can introduce the concept of nonassociative star product using partial derivatives

on a conventional flat phase space with contributions of a totally antisymmetric Rija. Then, we try to

elaborate on curved nonassociative phase space generalizations when in the total space there are consid-

ered nonassociative frames/ metrics / connections etc. with both star and nonholonomic deformations

of geometric data,

( ,  )  (, ,  )  (; e[], g [], D[]).

(14)

Following a geometric approach, the definition of various types of curve nonassociative phase spaces with respective nonholonomic, e[], metric, g[], and linear connection, D[], structures depends explicitly on the type of star product we fix for partial derivatives on a flat phase space. This way, we consider star generalized frame transforms and generalized metric and connection structures deforming nonholonomically a flat T V to a curved M := T V, with nonassociative mixing of coordinate and (co) frame indices. Here we note that in noncommutative and nonassociative geometry we can define an infinite number of local differential calculi because there are different definitions of star products, various types of adapting to nonholonomic structures and different concepts of connections, symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics etc. In such cases, there are a number of ambiguities for elaborating equivalent geometric models and selecting physically important theories from an infinite number of nonholonomic generalizations in the total space with T V  M. It is also a problem how to find unique constraints/ limits, for instance, to GR and commutative standard particle theories.

· Convention 2: In a self-consistent geometric form, we can consider a commutative T V with curved spacetime and phase space geometric data ( e, g, D) determined as a lift of geometric objects from a spacetime V (for instance, in GR) to its (co) tangent bundle. This way, we can construct nonassociative deformations

( e, g , D;

(15)

and solutions of standard or modified commutative Einstein eqs in nonholonomic variables) 

(N : star deformations of nonholonomic geometric objects e, g, D;

and solutions of nonassociative gravitational eqs

which are nonassociative deformations of solutions of commutative gravitational equations).

In brief, we elaborate on star deformed geometric models on phase spaces following another procedure than (14),
( ,  )  ( e, g , D)  (; e, g [], D[]),

14

where we consider nonholonomic deforms from a flat phase space to a curve commutative nonholonomic phase space and then we consider star deforms using, for instance, a N-adapted nonholonomic structure of type (12). In such a geometric approach, we firstly take a well defined commutative geometric/ physical model with respective (co) frame / metric / connection / physical objects and equations, and corresponding lifts and nonholonomic deformations in commutative (co) tangent bundles. Then, secondly, we N -transform all types of nonholonomic commutative geometric/ physical data in a selfconsistent form generating a nonassociative nonholonomic phase space M. On the base manifold, we can consider horizontal frame transforms ei = eii(x, p)i with eii eji = ij , when
ei  ei = eii ei  ei, Rijapa ei  ej = Rijapa i  j ,
and re-define (13) in not N-adapted form involving local coordinate frames in respective forms written similarly to formulas (2.1) and (2.2) of [12]. In general N-elongated frames e and/or e, we have non-trivial anholonomy coefficients (8) which contribute with additional terms in various N-adapted coefficient formulas for linear connections and respective torsion, curvature, Ricci and other type dtensors. Such nonholonomic commutative geometric effects are studied in details in Refs. [8, 9]. Similar formulas can be reproduced by analogy on T V, T V and T V.

In our works, we follow the Convention 2, when the fundamental geometric objects and physically impor-
tant equations and their solutions are defined in N-adapted form and then we star deform all commutative geometric/ physical data into respective nonassociative geometric / equations / solutions on the total space of M. In this approach, Rija are taken for a string theory, or other type model. They determine star deforma-
tions on a base commutative nonholonomic manifold V and together with lifts and nonholonomic structures on T V and T V generate a nonassociative differential geometry of phase space M. We emphasize that the
sign in exponential terms in (13) is taken as in coordinate bases of [13] which is opposite to the sign used
in [12]. Such an approach allows us to consider geometrically "by analogy" both types of coordinate and/or
N-adapted nonholonomic and star deformed formulas. For z = xi and q = pi, the first part of the star product with trivial N-connection structure, when
z N q = z  q, the formulas (13) give the non-trivial commutator (1). Such products are nonassociative and violate the Jacobi identity. To guaranty compatibility with the exterior derivative we can follow a proposal
from [44] suggesting to replace partial derivatives by Lie derivatives L ei and L ei on respective directions ei and ei. On nonholonomic manifolds, all derivatives can be considered in N-adapted form, when the star product (13) is defined respectively as

z N q

:=

z

·

q

-

i 2

[(L

ei z)(L

eiq) + (L

ei z)(L

ei q)]

(16)

+

i4s 12

Rija[(Lpa

ei z)(L

ej q) + (L

ej z)(Lpa

ei q)] + . . .

A nonassociative Lie star product (16) can be re-written in "non N-adapted" forms when ei  /xi and ea  dpa etc. using respective frame transforms9.

Nonholonomic twist d-operators and N-adapted universal R-matrices: The operator FN-1 (13) is called respectively the N-twist which transforms in the usual twist operator F-1
if the formulas are redefined in terms of coordinate bases. In all cases (with N , or without any label), it is
9such formulas are 8-d cotangent Lorentz bundles variants of formula (2.4) in [12]; we consider in certain cases corresponding coordinate base constructions because they allow to understand how generalizations are performed in this work; nevertheless, coordinate bases are not convenient for decoupling and integrating nonlinear systems of physically important PDEs and we shall always give priorities to N-adapted formulas which admit application of the AFCDM.

15

satisfied the property F-1(z, q) = F(z, q). Using such values, we can define respective permutation d-operators of scalars in star products in the form

z N q = ·[FN-1(z, q)] = ·[FN (q, z)] = ·[FN-1 FN FN (q, z)] := RN (q) N RN (z);
:=RN
z  q = ·[F-1(z, q)] = ·[F(q, z)] = ·[F-1 FF (q, z)] := R(q)  R(z).
:=R

The notations in these formulas mean that respective R-matrix (permutation d-operator) acts fist on q and then on z, and after that the corresponding star product is carried out. For instance, we have

z N q

=

zq +

i4s 6

Rij

apa(ei

z)(ej

q)

+

.

.

.

and

RN (q) N RN (z)

=

q

N

z

-

2

i4s 6

Rijapa(eiq)

N

(ej z)

+

.

.

.

=

qz

+

i4s 6

Rijapa(eiq)(ej z)

-

2

i4s 6

Rijapa(eiq)

N

(ej z)

+

.

.

.

=

zq

+

i4s 6

Rijapa(eiz)(ej q)

+

.

.

.

;

zq

=

zq +

i4s 6

Rijapa

(i

z)(j

q)

+

.

.

.

and

R(q)  RN (z)

=

q



z

-

2

i4s 6

Rij

apa(iq)



(j

z)

+

.

.

.

=

qz

+

i4s 6

Rijapa(iq)(j z)

-

2

i4s 6

Rijapa(iq)



(j z)

+

.

.

.

=

zq

+

i4s 6

Rijapa(iz)(j q)

+

.

.

.

,

respectively for N and , and z, q  C(M).

Nonholonomic associators: An associator  is a geometric object (d-object, for nontrivial nonholonomic configurations) which reorders
the brackets in star products of three functions. It can be defined for N and . For simplicity, we shall present hereafter only formulas for N if that will not result in ambiguities. The d-operator  acts on the functions
first and then the star product is executed. Such a star product is determined by respective (non) holonomic (co) bases. By definition,

 : ( z N q) N v = z N ( q N v) := z N (q N v).

(17)

Our system of notations is different from that in [12] (for instance, in that work it is used q instead of q; we shall put equivalently an up abstract label, like q, if a low one will be not convenient in certain formulas)
because we consider N-adapted constructions and follow a convention to use left up and low labels for the
symbols. Similarly, we can introduce the inverse associator  shifting brackets to the left,

 : z N (q N v) = ( z N q) N v := (z N q) N v.

16

The d-operators  and  are central and commute respectively with F and R. Explicit N-adapted and/or coordinate calculus result in expressions

(z, q, k) = exp

i4s 6

Rij

k

(Lei

z

)(Lej

q

)(Lek

v)

( z N q N v),

(18)

where indices i, j, k are taken from splitting a = n + i, b = n + j, c = n + k. Using N-adapted frames (7), when h-components ei are identified with ei, we express (17) as

( z N q)N k =

z N (q N k) =



1 r!

(

4s 6

)sRi1j1k1

.

.

.

Rir j r kr

(ei1

.

.

.

eir

z)N

(ej1 . . . ejr q) N (ek1 . . . ekr v)

.

r=1

Similar formulas hold true for the inverse associator  following the rule that it switches the sign in the exponent and kipping in mind that Rija is antisymmetric. This way we conclude that a permutation of the arguments invests the twists in N-adapted or coordinate frame forms, when (z, q, k) = (z, k, q). Using the R-matrix, we can invert the associator,

z N ( q N k) = z N RN ( k) N RN ( q) .

(19)

We conclude that the definition of nonassociative star product [12] preserves its properties for N-adapting in the sense that it admits in all cases two important d-operators: the R-matrix capture the effect of noncommutativity
and the associator  characterizes nonassociativity. Nonholonomic distributions allow such a diadic decomposition
of the coefficients of fundamental geometric objects and physically important PDEs when it is possible to decouple and integrate such systems in general forms, for nonassociative gravity models (such properties are proven in our partner works).

N-adapted nonassociative tri-products: The nonassociative star products studied in this work are different form the standard one on the Moyal-
Weyl plane because in our case there are involved momentum/ velocity type coordinates. We elaborated on such theories in the so-called Finsler extensions of string theory [26, 27] and by applying generalized FinslerLagrange-Hamilton methods in heterotic string gravity and modifications [2, 4, 8, 9]. In [58], it was studied the relation between the star and tri-products in relation to configuration spaces and conformal field theories. Using the formalism of N­connections and adapted star products (13), we can define so-called tri-products for functions on configuration spaces via

q[1]  q[2]  . . .  q[r]

=

q[1] N q[2] N . . . q[r-1] N q[r] . . . 

|p8=0 



=

·

exp

-

4s 12

1a<b<c[r]

Rij k (eai



ebj



eck )

q[1]  q[2]  . . .  q[r]



for integer labeling values [r], a, b, c, where p8 is energy type coordinate in momentum space. So, we first evaluate the nested star product and then restrict the values to the so-called p8 = 0 leaf. For instance, this implies that q[1]  q[2] = q[1]q[2], when tri-products have the peculiar property for all type of N-adapted partial derivatives all R-flux dependent corrections become total derivatives. We obtain such simplifications:

d4xq[1]  q[2]  . . .  q[r] = d4xq[1]q[2] . . . q[r].

All formulas with nonassociative tri-products involving nonholonomic structures in coordinate frames transform into similar constructions with membrane corrections of deviations from p8 = 0, see [39, 58].

17

2.2.2 Nonholonomic star scalars and the Leibniz rule
The Leibniz rule for star product [37, 44], see also [12], can be considered for nonholonomic manifolds and bundle spaces.
We define a star scalar z is a d-object that transforms under star diffemorphism N-adapted forms  = iN ei (here we consider only h-components and total space constructions and v-components will be considered below) with the star Lie N-adapted derivative, z = Lz := i N eiz. Than we demand that the star product of two star scalars should be also a star scalar when

(q N z) = L(q N z) = i N ei(q N z) = i N (eiq N z) + i N (q N eiz). Using the R-matrix and the associator , we formulate a generalized Leibnitz rule,

i N (q N eiz) = (i N q) N eiz =  RN (q) N RN (i) N (eiz) = RN (q) N 2(RN (i) N (eiz)). This permutation formula inverts the arguments as an associator similarly to (19),

L (q N z) = L( q) N ( z) + RN ( 2q) N LR N ( 2 ) 2 z.

(20)

Now, we can develop the theory in N-adapted form for nonassociative star d-tensors.

Star­commutators of d-vectors and d-covectors:
We define a star covector in N-adapted form i = eiq with ei (5) (in similar forms we can consider (7)). This is the h-part of a star distinguished 1-form which is subjected to such transformation laws

(eiq) = ei(q) = j N (ej eiq) + (eij ) N (ej q) and i = L i = j N (ej i) + (eij) N j .

In a compatible form with above formulas for covectors, a star d-vector vi is defined using formulas

vi = L vi = j N (ej vi) - RN (vj ) N RN (ej i),

which guarantees that z = vi N wi transforms as a star scalar. By definition, the star commutator of star d-vectors, [, ]N := [, ] FN-1, which is equal to the Lie derivative
in N-adapted from, is constructed to be manifestly antisymmetric and satisfy the horizontal, h, conditions

[ hv, h]N = vj N (ej i) - RN (j) N RN (ej vi) = -[RN ( hv), RN ( h)]N .

(21)

Similar transformation laws hold for  when (N , ei, RN )  (, i, R).

Star d-tensors products: Let us explain how to construct star d-tensor products as generalizations of definitions for d-vectors and

d-covectors. To motivate the formulas we consider a star tensor product of h-vectors and, respectively, a star

d-tensor,

hv N hz = {vi N zj } and hb = {bij }.

Extending the Leibniz rule (20) to d-tensor products, we write down

L ( hv N hz)

=

L 



(

hv)

N

(

z)

+

RN (

h 2

v

)

N

LRN (

)

h 2

z

and L bij = k N (ekbij) - (eki) N bkj - (ekj ) N bik.

In a similar form, we can consider higher order h-components of d-tensors and redefinitions for  products.

18

N-adapted composition, closure of commutators and star Taylor expansion: To eliminate breaking ambiguities with actions of two Lie derivatives on d-objects, is convenient to introduce
the commutator of such derivatives with the closure property

[L , L]N hv = L[,]N hv. This condition is satisfied if by definition

[L , L]N

hv

:=

L

(L 



(

h 

v))

-

LR N

(

)(LR N (

)(

hv)).

Such d-operators are similar to those for the Hopf algebras and can be extended for d-algebras, see discussion in section 2.3 of [12]. The composition · of operators O, A, B and commutators in N-adapted or local coordinate basis forms satisfy the rules

(O · O)( hv) = O(O( hv)) and [A, B] = A · B - R(B) · R(A).

(22)

Finally, we note that every function q(x)  C(V ) and/or respective extensions on (co) tangent bundles are star scalars as it is discussed in section 2.4 of [12]. Nonholonomic structures on such manifolds/ bundles do not modify properties of star Taylor expansions like



q(x) =

qs1,s2,...,skxs11  (xs22  (. . .  xskk ) . . .),

s1,s2,...,sk=0

which are nonassociative analogs of commutative spacetime Taylor series



q(x) =

qs1,s2,...,skxs11 xs22 . . . xskk . . . ,

s1,s2,...,sk=0

which holds for xi  xi = xixi, with linear functions l(x) = xi and a subset of those star scalars for which the star multiplications in expansions act trivially.

2.3 Nonassociativity, N-connections, and quasi-Hopf algebras

In [13], the general covariance under quasi-Hopf algebra of deformed diffeomorphisms is implemented in order to formulate a version of vacuum nonassociative Einstein equations. Authors of that paper elaborated both an abstract and coordinate base formalism which is not suitable for a general decoupling of nonassociative and/or (non) commutative gravitational equations. In our approach, we use nonholonomic manifolds and (co) tangent bundles, and their nonassociative generalizations, which allows us to extend the AFCDM for constructing exact and parametric solutions of nonassociative geometric flow and gravitational field (Ricci soliton) equations. In N-adapted form, this involves distinguished algebras, d-algebras, for a conventional nonholonomic h- and (c)v-splitting, and respective quasi-Hopf d-algebras.
Let us consider the universal enveloping Hopf algebra U Vec(M) of the Lie algebra of vector fields Vec(M) on M. For non-trivial N-connection structures with h- and v-splitting of phase space M = T V, we elaborate on a nonholonomic algebraic and geometric formalism with d-vectors and d-tensors. A nonholonomic splitting Vec(M) = hVec(M)  vVec(M) follows from the definition of N-connection structure (4). This defines a Hopf d-algebra U Vec(M, N ). We note that our results do not depend on the signature of the spacetime metric but to study nonassociative modifications of GR the signature of the basic spacetime manifolds must be stated to be Lorentzian. The N-adapted cochain twist element FN (13) can be written in the form

FN = FN FRN = FRN FN ,

(23)

19

for a nonholonomic Hopf 2-cocycle (determining a nonholonomic Moyal-Weyl deformation of the phase space) FN = exp ei  en+i - en+i  ei
and a nonholonomic 2-cocycle for the so-called R-flux

FRN = exp

i 2

Rjka

pa ek 

ej -

ej  pa ek

,

where  := 3s/6 and are treated as independent small deformation parameters (in some works, one consider as parameters s and ). Such twist operators can be parameterized in terms of certain elements f, f  U Vec(M) when
FN := f  f = 1  1 + O ( , 3s), with inverse twist FN-1 := f  f; FRN := fRN  fRN = 1  1 + O (),

where summation on low-up repeating indices is understood.
A Hopf d-algebra U Vec(M, N ) is determined by such N-adapted structures: a) a co-product defined as
(1) = 11, ( e) = 1 e + e 1; b) a co-unit  defined as (1) = 1, ( e) = 0; and c) and an antipode S defined as S(1) = 1, S( e) = - e; such and  d-operators are extended to the total space U Vec(M, N ) as d-algebra homomorphisms and S extended as an d-algebra anti-homomorphism (linear, anti-multiplicative
and N-adapted). The N-connection splitting states a h- and v-decomposition = (h , v ). A quasi-Hopf d-algebra U VecF (M, N ) is generating as an extension in N-adapted form with power series in
and  of a Hopf d-algebra U Vec(M, N ) using a twist FN (23). The algebraic Hopf d-structure is preserved for respective F-extended d-objects: co-product F = FN FN-1; quasi-antipode SF = S; and co-unit F = . Explicitly, there are satisfied such important properties:

F ( ei) = 1  ei + ei  1, F ( ea) = 1  ea + ea  1 + iRjka ej  ek and f S(f) = fRN S(fRN ) = f S(f) = fRN S(fRN ) = 1.

As in holonomic bases, the N-adapted variant of twist FN does not fulfill the 2-cocycle condition and we have to consider the associator (17). For Hopf d-algebraic structures, we use such an associator  (defining a Hopf 3-cocycle; see also formula (18)) and its inverse associator -1,

N

=

exp

3s 6

Rn+j

n+k

n+i

ej 

ek 

ei

= 1  2  3 = 1  1  1 + O(3s),

and -N1 = 1  2  3.

The co-product F is not co-associative because the 2-cocycle condition is not hold true, when

N ( FN  1)( id  1) FN = (1  FN )( id  1) FN results in a quasi-associativity condition

N ( F id  1) F () = (id  F ) F ()N ,   U Vec(M, N ).
We conclude that a sextuple (U Vec(M, N ), ·, F , N , S,) defines on the d-vector space U Vec(M, N ), i.e. on T M = T T V, a structure of quasi-Hopf d-algebra U VecF (M, N ). Such geometric d-objects and nonholonomic structures can be defined, for instance, on T T V which can be used for constructing models of nonassociative Finsler-Lagrange geometry.
In above formulas, we use boldface d-operators in order to emphasize that we work with N-adapted algebraic and geometric structures. For e   and respective F  F , N  , S  S etc., we

20

obtain the definition of standard Hopf algebra U Vec(M) and coordinate base constructions as in [60, 13, 44]. The nonholonomic geometric formalism reproduces, in principle, all results from those papers and [12] if we follow the Convention 2 and re-define the symbols and indices of geometric objects. In this article, we do not repeat such abstract algebraic and geometric calculations but provide certain important N-adapted coefficient formulas in order to familiarize readers with a nonholonomic (non) associtative/ commutative geometric background for the AFCDM which is used in our partner works.

2.4 The star product on nonholonomic phase spaces
The N-adapted star product (13) can be naturally considered on total spaces of nonholonomic (co) tangent Lorentz bundles. On M, we can use local coordinates u = (x, p) (3), for a phase space with complex cofibers on T V), which are associated to u = (x, p) for real cofibers in T V.

2.4.1 Momentum like nonholonomic variables on phase spaces with complex cofibers A vector on T V can be written in a d-vector in N-adapted form,

A( u) = (A(x, p), A(x, p)) = A( u) N e = Ai( u) N ei + Ab( u) N i eb, for Ab( u) N i eb = Ab( u) N eb;
= A( u)   = Ai( u)  i + Ab( u)  i eb, for Ab( u)  i eb = Ab( u)  eb,
where nonholonomic bases are similar, respectively to (7) and coordinate bases. The N-adapted star products (13) can be generalized to T V in these respective forms:

q N z = ·

exp

1 2

Pi N P i - P i N Pi +

M i N Pi - Pi N M i q N z ,

(24)

where P = (Pi = Lei, P a = i L ea ) and

M

=

-

F

 

u

P = (Mi = 0,

Mi

=

i4s 6

LRijb

pb

ej ).

(25)

In N-adapted form, we have such constraints on coefficients

F

 

(

u) which can be stated algebraically for

any prescribed Rija, pa and ek = k - Nak( u) a, see formulas (10), in order to satisfy the conditions

F i = 0 and any nontrivial

F

a 

(

u)

u

=

-

i4s 6

LRajk

pj

ek .

(26)

The nonassociative d-operators (25) implies a nontrivial action on base 1-form d u = (dxi, dpi) because of Lie N-adapted derivatives. Considering a similar 1-form on T V, when d u = (dxi, (i )-1dpi), which is similar to dXI used in formulas (3.5) in [12], and using [L, d] = 0, we compute in coordinate bases

P (d u) = 0 and

M (d u) =

F

 

d

u or

M

a(dxj )

=

-

i4s 6

Rajcpc.

With respect to N-elongated frames e, we obtain

P( e) = 0 and

M (

e) =

N

F

 

e ,

(27)

see formulas (26). We can chose, for instance, such data when

N Fi   = 0,

NFa

kl = 0,

,

NFa

ib

8b

=

-

i4s 6

Rajcpc.

(28)

21

Applying coordinate transforms adapted to a prescribed N-connection structure, we can transform such values

into some functionals

N

F

 

[Rajc, pc,

Nak (

u)].

Acting on

 =   d u = j  d xi + a  d pb = ej N ei + ea N eb,

(29)

where  is considered as a coordinate basis in T V with complexified fiber coordinates, we find

P ( )

=

0 and

M ( ) =

F

 

 or

Ma( b) =

M a(i

b)

=

-

i4s 6

Rabc

c;

P(

e )

=

0 and

M (

e) =

N

F

 

e .

(30)

Such formulas are similar to those for the relativistic Hamilton geometry on T V, see details in [8, 9], where

M a defines a complex anholonomic structure determined by even in coordinate frames on Rijk.

There is a natural generalization of this formalism with nonholonomic star products (13) and (24) for

Moyal-Wely spaces (see [1, 2], Part III of [61] and [62]) which can be also related to double field theory and

appropriated curved backgrounds [63, 39]. Using a N-adapted basis e = ( ei, eb) (10), we define an antisymmetric d-tensor

eij := pn+i ej - pn+j ei,

(31)

for some v-indices a = n + i, b = n + j and c = n + k, defining a nonvanishing Lie bracket,

[ en+k, eij] = ki ej - kj ei.

A variant of cochain twist element FN (23) is defined by

FNc = exp

-

i 2

ej N

en+j -

en+j N

ej

-

i 2

Rjkn+i

eki N ej - ej N eki

,

which is an element of the Hopf d-algebra U iso(2n)  U VecF (M, N ).
Such a Lie bracket relates in N-adapted form certain h- and v-components of e and any collections of components of a d-vector e  X = ( Xi, Xb) and respective d-tensor eij  Xij := pn+i Xj - pn+j Xi. This allows to compute any FNc [ X] and provides a nonassociative N-adapted deformation of M. In the present paper, we shall work with N-adapted bases e and cobases e and FN (23) if necessary in the form FNc for quasi-Hopf d-algebra configurations.

2.4.2 Nonholonomic star commuting scalars and d-vectors
Let us consider how to compute in N-adapted form the expression q( u)   given in coordinate form. We note that for a function q( u) = q(x, p) = q(x, p), in contrast to iq, the star derivatives like i  q and ei N q act on q encoding both the nonassociative and nonholonomic structures.

The h-components in T V : We have q  i = q · i = q  i - i  q = 0, for i = i = /xi.
Considering ei = ei = ei (x, p) = ei (x, p)  , see formula (7) for p  i p = p, we treat any coefficient ei(x, p) as a function similar to q(x, p). In result, for any N-adapted construction
q N ei = q · ei = q N ei - ei N q = 0.

22

Additional terms arise when these h-formulas are extended on total phase space T V with star products of type (24). For an arbitrary q(x, p), we compute

qi

a

=

q·i

a

-

1 2

Pk

q

·

M k(i

a) = q · i

a

+

i4s 12

Rajk

j q

 k,

i.e. q  i

a - i

a

q

=

4s 6

Raj

k

j q

 k

For nonholonomic distributions, via frame transforms and N-elongating the partial h-derivatives in the terms with R... and taking ea = i ea = i a, we can write

q N i

ea = q · i

ea +

4s 12

Raij

ej q N

ek

i.e.

q N

ea -

ea

N

q

=

4s 6

Raj

k

ej q

N

ek .

In a more general context, we can consider such principles of N-adapted twist deformation: Let
AN = (hA, vA) be a d-algebra that carries a N-adapted representation of a Hopf d-algebra U Vec(M, N ) and a respective induced by a R-flux twist deformation into a quasi-Hopf d-algebra U VecF (M, N ) as we defined
in subsection 2.3. A d-vector  = (h, v)  Vec(M, N ) acts on A N in such a form: 1) For every algebraic product ab, we have (ab) = u(a)b + au(b), i.e. we have a U Vec(M, N )-module d-algebra AN . 2) Then, this multiplication is deformed into a N-adapted star multiplication

a N b = f(a)f(b) = fi(a)fi(b) + fc(a) fc(b),

(32)

which results in a noncommmutative and nonassociative d-algebra AN = (hA, vA). AN carries a representation of the quasi-Hopf d-algebra U VecF (M, N ) because for any element  of this
d-algebra we prove in N-adapted form that

(a N b) =  f(a)f(b) = (10) f(a))(20)(f(b) = f((10)(a))(20)(f(b)).

In these formulas, it is used a un-deformed N-adapted co-product () = (10) N (20) when ()FN-1 = FN-1 F ().

N-adapted star commuting scalars on total phase space T V: Above formulas can be written on total complexified Lorentz cobundles using (27) and (30). They state
that the star product acts in the same way in coordinate frames and coframes using N . Respectively, we can consider

q

 -

  q =  F 

 q 

 and q  d u - d u  q =

F



 

q  d

u.

(33)

Here it should be noted that expressions of type A   and   A are not equivalent. The nontrivial

coefficients of two (in general, different but related) geometric objects F  and

F

 

are

determined

by

Rajk. Our conventions are different from similar formulas (3.10) and (3.11) in [12] where there are used the

values I and I , but we accept the convention to use expressions of type A  . This has also consequences

for the right and left multiplications of scalars and vectors respective modifications of the Leibnitz rule. For

instance, we derive

q  ( A  ) = (q  A)  ,

(34)

( A  )  q = ( A  q)   - F   q  ,

(q  z) = q  z + q  z - F   q  z.

In explicit form for momentum d-operators (27) and (30), we write

[ P, M] =

F

 

P  and

M (q  z) =

M q  z + q  M z + M F 

 q  z,

(35)

23

where the coefficients

F

 

,

 F

, M F

 are different but determined by Rajk (we can prescribe values

which are compatible to analogous formulas (3.16) in [12]).

In N-adapted forms, the formulas (33) are written

q N

e - e N q = N F 

eq N

e and q N

e -

e  N q =

N

F

 

e q N

e.

(36)

The multiplication and modification of Lebintz rules (34) and (35) can be redefined with boldface symbols and N terms for star commuting rules (36).

R matrix action in T V: For a scalar and a d-vector, we have the relation

RN (q) N RN ( A N e) = RN (q) N RN ( A) N e + N F RN ( eq) N RN ( A) N e. (37) By iteration, we can interchange two d-vectors following the rules

RN ( A N e) N RN ( B N e) = RN ( A) N e N RN ( B) N e

-

N

F

 

RN

(

A ) N

e N RN ( e B) N

e

+

N

F

 

RN

(

e

A) N

e N RN ( B ) N

e

-

N

F

 

N F RN (

e

A ) N

e N RN ( e B) N

e .

(38)

Such properties were proven for arbitrary quasi-Hopf algebras [42, 43]. In this subsection, we performed a N-adapted (co) tangent Lorentz bundle generalization of constructions from [12]. Respectively, above formulas can be written for coordinate frames with respective star .

Hopf d-algebras, N-adapted Lie derivatives, and R action on functions on T V: For a commutative d-algebra AN and it N-adapted star deformation AN , we can control noncommutativity
via the action of R-matrix, RN = FN-2, when for the star product (32) of two elements a and b is computed

a N b = R (b) N R(a) := b N a = bk N ak + bc N ac, = f(a)f(b) = f(b)f(a), where b := R(b) and a := R(a).

If the d-algebra AN is associative, we can use the associator d-operator  acting as

 : (a N b) N c = 1 a N ( 2 b N 3 c),

(39)

where, for instance, 1a = 1(a). In coordinate bases, a similar proof is provided in [12], see also references therein.
Let us consider a simplest case of algebraic operations for a function q  C(M, N ), where the space of functions is C(M) where usual partial derivatives can be transformed into N-adapted ones. The Lie dderivative L(q) := (q) is defined by any d-vector field  =  e. The action of the Lie d-algebra Vec(M, N ) on such functions can be extended to an action of the universal enveloping d-algebra U Vec(M, N ) if we define
the Lie d-derivative on products of d-vectors L 1 2... m := L 1  L 2  ...  L m and by linearity. Then we deform with power series on and  the U Vec(M, N )-module d-algebra C(M, N ) into U VecF (M, N )module d-algebra AN := C(M, N ) for which the d-vector space is considered the same as C(M, N ) but with multiplication defined by a N-adapted star product (13), or (16). For two functions q, z  C(M, N ),
the N-adapted star product is possess such properties:

q N z = f(q) · f(z)

(40)

= R(z) N R(q) := z N q controls noncommutativity ;

and  : (z N q) N f = 1z N ( 2 q N 3 f ) controls nonassociativity.

24

For such conventions on nonholonomic and nonassociative distributions, the constant function 1 on M is also

the unit of the star d-algebra AN which is stated by the property that q N 1 = q = 1 N q.

Similarly to (21), we can consider a N-adapted and define on nonholonomic phase space (M, N ) a

sqtuaarsic-oPmoimssuotnatcoororodf ifnuantcetido-naslg, e[bq,raz]sNim=ilaqr

N to

z- (1),

z

N

q,

xj, xk N = 2iRn+j n+k apa, xi, pn+j N = i ij and [pn+i, pn+j ]N = 0, for a parabolic R-fluc nonholonomic background, and a nontrivial Jacobiator

xi, xj , xk N = 3sRn+i n+j n+k.
We note that such formal coordinate functions on T V are computed with indices determined with respect to e.

2.4.3 Star pairing between d-vectors and d-forms
Let us study the star pairing on nonholonomic phase spaces for N-adapted star vectors and star forms. We begin with this convention on star product of N-adapted bases and cobases in T V :

e N e = e N e =  .

(41)

The next two conventions are that the action of the N-adapted star product on basis d-vectors must be on the right and for the N-adapted basis d-covectors the cation is on the left, when

A = A N e and B = B N e.

We express

A N B = ( A N e) N ( B N e) = A N  N B = A N B = Ai N Bi + AaN Ba.

This way, we define the contraction of d-vectors and d-covectors as a d-operator:

<, >N : T VN T V  R, AN B  <, >N FN-1( A, B) = A N B,
where the first entry in <, >N is reserved for a d-vector and the second one is for a d-covector. Similar parings can be defined using .

2.5 The nonassociative star d-tensor calculus
We elaborate a nonassociative star tensor calculus which can be performed in N-adapted and coordinate form. The purpose is to show how this concretely works for the nonassociative and nonholonomic star products (13). Such a calculus will be used in next sections for formulating explicit models of nonassociative nonholonomic differential geometry and modified gravity theories.

25

2.5.1 N-adapted Lie-derivatives of star scalars

By definition a star scalar q( u) on T V is a quantity which in N-adapted form under diffeomorphisms generated by a d-vector  (choosing the convention  =  N e instead of e N ) transforms under the rule
q = Lq =  N eq =   q.
It is also demanded that the star product of two scalars is also a star scalar and that the switching partial derivatives obey the rule from (34) and (37) (see also (19))

L(q N z) = = =

 N e(q N z)  N ( eq N z) +  N (q N ez) - F   (L q) N z + RN (q) N 2 LR N ()z .

 N ( eq N ez)

These formulas can be written equivalently for respective frames and star product  when the Leibniz rule does not change.

2.5.2 Nonholonomic star Lie derivatives of d-vectors and d-covectors

Twisting commutators for d-vectors: The formula for the horizontal star commutator (21) is extended on total phase space with twisted N-adapted
and/or coordinate basis commutators which guarantees covariant behaviours under star multiplications,

 A = L( A) = [, A]N = [, ]N  FN-1.

This can be computed in component form which does not emphasize, or (inversely) state explicitly, respective

terms

F

 

and

 F

 correspondingly determined by Rajk,

L( A) = ( A) - RN ( A)RN ()

=  N e A N e - RN ( A) N eRN ( ) N e,

(42)

L ( A) =  N e A - RN ( A) N eRN ( ) - RN ( eµ A) N e(RN (  )) F µ.

Extending on T V the h-compositions (22) for a N-connection structure, we compute

( ·N )q = (  q) =  N e (  N e) = (  N  ) N e e q + (  N e  ) N eq -  F µ(  N e  ) N eµ eq

and (RN  ·N RN )q = (  N  ) N e eq + (RN ( ) N eRN (  )) N e q +(F µRN ( e ) N eRN (  )) N eµq +( F µ  N ( e )) N e eµq.
Adding both last terms and after corresponding cancellations we obtain

[L , L]N q = ( (q)) - (RN ) (RN ()(q)) = L[,]N .

(43)

A tedious calculus in N-adapted or coordinate basis forms allow to verify the Leibniz rule

[ A, [ B, C]N ]N = [[ A, B]N , C]N + 2[RN ( A), [RN ( B), C]N ]N . The formula for twisting commutator (43) can be written in equivalent form using .

26

Twisting commutators for d-covectors: We consider respective N-adapted dualizations of formulas (33), (34) and (36) using star d-covectors  =
d u  . Multiplying the formulas for (q  z), one computes (see similar details with cancellation of F -terms in (4.12) and the derivative operator  := dxI  I (4.13) from [12]),
d u  (q  z) = d u  q  z + q  d u  z, in local coordinate bases ; e N e(q N z) = e N eq N z + q N e N ez, in N-adapted frames .
We introduce the N-adapted derivative operator (it is not an exterior derivative of type d because the antisymmetrization is not involved)

 := d u  , e = e N e.

(44)

Using above formulas, we can check that the Lorentz rule holds true, for instance,

e(q N z) = e(q) N z + q N e(z),

(45)

when  and e from (44) commutes with the star N-adapted product and also the respective R matrixes. From a star scalar, we can produce a 1-form, eq = e N eq. So, we can interchange  with e
without producing extra terms and use formulas

 eq = e q = e( ) N eq+  N e eq.

For a star 1-form

 = d u   = e N ,

we write in abstract and component forms,

L  =  N e  + e  N  and L  =  N e  + e  N .

(46)

These formulas prove that the star Lie N-adapted derivatives of d-vectors (42) and d-covectors (46) are compatible with the contraction. We obtain a scalar if we contact a d-vector A and covector , when

L ( A N ) =  L ( A ) N  + RN ( A) N 2 LR N ()( ) .

(47)

Such formulas hold true for .

2.5.3 Star Lie N-adapted derivatives and d-tensor products
We investigate in more details the notion of nonassociative star product for d-tensors. We define respective star tensor products adapted to respective coordinate or N-frame structures (usually, we shall write down Nadapted formulas), respectively,  :=   F-1 and N := N  FN-1, which is similar to the definition of star products and respective commutators. We can prescribe any of such tensor products in T V and then consider nonholonomic and star deformations on T V.

The Leibniz rule for star d-tensors: This rule for two d-tensors Q and K can be written in the form
L ( Q N K) = (L ( Q) N K) + RN ( Q) N 2 LR N () K .

27

Let us consider, for instance, how to apply this rule to an element

Q = A N B  T V N (T V),
= A N e N B N e, = ( A N B - N Fµ  Aµ N e B) N ( e N e),

(48)

where for (co) tangent Lorentz bundles the abstract (primed) indices can be moved up/down using the
standard Lorentz metric  = (ij, ab ) with ij = (1, 1, 1, -1) and ab = (1, 1, 1, -1). Using (38), we can compute the transpose QT which results in interchange of indices related to corresponding cancellations,

QT = RN ( B ) N RN ( A ) = RN ( A N e) N RN ( B N e), = ( A N B - N Fµ  Aµ N e B) N ( e N e).

(49)

We have that R­symmetric and R­antisymmetric d-tensors correspond respectively to symmetric and antisymmetric matrices.

Contraction of star d-tensor products:
The contraction of d-tensor products is done by multiplying the d-covectors and d-vectors standing next to
each other following the convention (41). We can also bring the basis d-vectors and d-covector to the middle as in (48) and apply the rule < e N e , e N e >= . Considering second rank d-tensors as respective products of d-vectors and d-covectors,

A N B  T V N (T V) and  N   (T V) N (T V), we write the product

< A N B,  N  >N = ( A N B )N (  N ) - N Fµ  ( Aµ N e B) N (  N  ) - N Fµ ( Aµ N B) N (e  N  ).
Formulas (48) and (49) can be applied in similar form to d-forms, which allow to show the transposition symmetry of the previous formula,

< A N B,  N  >N =< RN ( B) N RN ( A),RN ( ) N RN ( ) >N .

(50)

Such formulas can generalized in a straightforward forms to higher rank d-tensors and .

N-adapted antisymmetric forms and star wedge products: Antisymmetric k-forms   kN T V are defined as usual but with additional requirements to be N-adapted
in respective cobases, with R-antisymmetry and adjusting to the star-wedge product to the N =   FN-1. For instance, the star wedge product of two one forms  and µ is defined in a clear R-antisymmetric form when
 N µ =  N µ - RN ( µ) N RN ( ). Using this formula and (50), we conclude that the star wedge product projects out the antisymmetric part
< A N B,  N µ >N =< A N B,  N µ >N - < RN ( B) N RN ( A),  N µ >N . (51)
The exterior derivative is defined as the antisymmetrized partial derivative
d := e = e N e =   
28

which is different from respective operators e (44). In this work, d is a nonholonomic generalization of the exterior derivative d =  = dxI  I used, for instance, in formula (4.28) from [12]. In N-adapted form, the exterior derivative d is invariant under the R-matrix, acting in a compatible forms with the Lie derivative, [L, d] = 0, where
d(  N µ) = d( ) N µ+  N d( µ).
For holonomic configurations, such nonassociative exterior differentials were studied in [37, 44].

2.6 Forms and d-tensors for quasi-Hopf N-adapted structures
In this subsection, we show that we can consider such types of N-adapted nonholonomic distributions when the star deformed geometric constructions with quasi-Hopf structure are similar to un-deformed analogs.

2.6.1 Nonassociative deformations of star exterior products

Let us consider the exterior algebra of differential forms (M, N ) and study N-adapted nonassociative deformations of star exterior products, i.e. respective (M, N ). Stating for zero-forms, i.e. functions with star N-adapted quasi-Hopf product (40), 0(M, N ) = AN we define the algebra of differential forms with nonassociative product N for any couple of 1-forms ,   1(M, N ) when
 N  = f( ) · f( ).

We use the N-adapted Lie derivative commuting with the exterior derivative for actions with/on N-elongated (co) bases ( e and e from (10)) and anti-symmetric h-vector eij (31), when

L e ( e) = 0, LRaij eij ( ek) = 2Rabk eb and , LRaij eij ( ec) = 0.

(52)

Iterating the commutativity of the exterior derivative in N-adapted form, d : (M, N )  +1(M, N ), we can work with the un-deformed Leibniz rule,

d(  N ) = d  N  + (-1)||  N d ,
where  is a homogeneous form of degree ||, and it is assumed that df( ) = f( d ) and df( ) = f( d ).
Both for N-adapted and coordinate cobases, we prove applying formulas (39) and (52) that their exterior products of such orthonormalized 1-forms result in

e N e = ( e N e) N e =

e N e = - e N e = - e N e and 1 e N ( 2 e N 3 e ) = e N ( e N e ) = e N e N e ,

where the associators act via Lie d-derivatives. Considering exterior products between functions, i.e. 0-forms and 1-forms, and respective N-adapted star deformations, we generate corresponding C(M, N )-bimodule and resulting AN ­bimodule structure of spaces of 1-forms 1N (M) =1(M, N ) and 1N (M) =1(M, N ). Such N-adapted coefficient formulas can be written in "packaged" form using an antisymmetric d-tensor R with non-vanishing components Rjka.
We present here some important formulas when the h- and c-components

f N

ej

=

f·

ej

-

 2

Rj

kbek

f

·

eb =

ej N f -

eb N Rjkbekf,

f N ea = f · ea = ea N f

29

are written with generalized indices,

f N e = e N (f  - iR ef ), when the absolute differential is star deformed in N-adapted form

df = ef e = ef N e = e N ef.

Above formulas can be re-defined in local coordinate bases,

f N dxj

=

f·

dxj

-

i 2

Rjkb

f xk

·

dpb

=

dxj N f -

dpb

N

iRjkb

f xk

,

f N dpa = f · dpa = dpa N f

This formalism can be extended to d-tensors involving N-connections and quasi-Hopf structures.

2.6.2 d-tensor and quasi-Hopf star deformations The N-adapted tensor product C(M,N)over C(M, N ) is deformed to a d-tensor product N over
d-algebra AN following the convention B N Q = f( B) C(M,N) f( Q).
In this formula, the N-adapted twist on the d-tensors B and Q is taken via the Lie d-derivative and the nonassociativity for any a  AN is involved as
( B N a) N Q = 1 B N ( 2a N 3Q).
The N-adapted star product N acts between functions and d-tensors and states on the space of d-vector fields Vec(M, N ) a N-adapted AN ­module structure, denoted by VecN . Explicit coefficient formulas are defined by computing Lie d-derivatives on N-elongated bases e = ( ej, eb) and respective twists,
L e ( e) = 0, LRaij eij ( ek) = 0 and LRaij eij ( eb) = 2Rabk ek. The N-adapted star product of a function f and h- and v-components of partial derivatives

f N ei = f · ei = ei N f

f N

ea

=

f·

ea

-

i 2

Rjkaej

f

·

ek =

ea N f -

ej N iRajkekf.

Here we nota that ei N f denotes the right N-adapted AN ­action on VecN (this is not on action of ei on the function f ). In generalized indices,

f N e = e N (f  + iR  ef ),

Using the N-adapted star tensor product, we can extend the AN ­bimodule VecN of d-vector fields to the ­bimodule VecN = VecN N (M, N ). An abstract differential form calculus with left and right actions, duality, module homomorphisms, and quantum Lie algebras of diffeomorphisms is elaborated in sections 3.53.7 of [13]. All constructions can be formulated in a similar form for N-adapted configurations. We omit such formulas in this work but present certain important N-adapted coefficient formulas which are necessary for formulating nonassociative gravitational field equations.

30

3 Nonassociative differential geometry with N-connections & nonsymmetric metrics
We define the geometric distinguished objects, d-objects, which are used for elaborating on nonholonomic extensions of nonassociative differential geometry models in [12, 13]. There are provided abstract and Nadapted coefficient formulas for star deformed distinguished connections, d-connections, their torsion and curvature distinguished tensors, d-tensors. It is studied the important case when properties of such d-objects are completely determined by symmetric and nonsymmetric star deformations of distinguished metrics, dmetrics. At the end of respective subsections, we provide coefficient formulas involving quasi-Hopf d-algebras.

3.1 Nonassociative linear connections and d­connections
The concepts of linear connection and associated covariant derivative in nonassociative differential geometry can be introduced in a general and/or N-adapted form, for distinguished connections, d-connections, not considering metric structures.

3.1.1 Covariant derivatives with d-connections
There are two geometrically consistent notions of covariant derivatives on nonassociative spaces which are determined by respective d-connections.

Left and right d-connections: On a (co) tangent Lorentz bundle enabled with respective real and/or complex momentum like coordinates,
a d-connection

D = ( hD, vD) = {D = (Di, Da)}, D = ( hD, vD) = { D = ( Di, Da)}, or

D = ( hD, vD) = { D = ( Di, Da)}

(53)

is a usual linear connection preserving under parallelism the h- and (c)v-splitting (4). For such a d-connection, we can define N-adapted coefficients of nonassociative analogs of generalized Christoffel symbols, which are determined by their coefficients  = { }. On nonassociative phase spaces, we can introduce a similar N-adapted covariant derivative as a d-operator D := e - , for e = { e} and compute such symbols using formula
 := e N e N  N e,
where star products act with star contractions. In similar forms, we can define and compute N-adapted coefficients  = {} and  = { } for real (co) tangent Lorentz bundles. A label "" will be used in order to distinguish certain geometric d-objects in nonassociative geometry from similar ones when additionally will be adapted to a quasi-Hopf d-structure (see next sections, when, for instance, it is written ).
Dealing with a noncommutative star product, we have either let a covariant d-operator to act from the left or from the right. This is related to the ambiguity from which side we multiply a corresponding ­operator, see details in [12]. For any star distinguished 1­form

 = e N ,  = e N ,  = e N ,

we can introduce respectively:

-D = D() = e -  N  or D- = () D = e -  N ;

(54)

- D



=

D( ) =

e  -  N

 or

- D

=(

) D =

e -

 N ;

-D  = D( ) = e  -  N  or D-  = ( ) D = e  -  N .

31

Here

we

note

that

equations

of

type

(45)

and

(47)

impose

the

condition

that

to

define

d-operators

of

type

- D

we

need to consider the R-matrix. It should be emphasized that both

the

left

- D

and

right

- D

covariant

d-derivatives

are

consistent.

Using

formulas (44) ­ (47), we can compute, for instance, such anomalous variations,  :=  - L, of the second terms in (54) and find that both left and right choices compensate (for simplicity, we consider star covectors)

contributions of  e  = e e  N  (we omit indices on d-vectors and 1-forms and write only one time the label " " in a term if this do not result in ambiguities). There are obtained the same values if

  = e e  :

(  N ) =   N  = e e  N 

(55)

(  N ) = RN ( ) N RN ()  =RN ( ) N e eRN ( )

= RN ( ) N RN ( e e ) = e e  N .

Such formulas can be proven for N and  when there are used respective 1-forms  and  and related d-vectors N-elongated (co) frames or coordinate ones.

An axiomatic viewpoint to covariant N-adapted derivatives: Geometrically, we can define a covariant d-derivative associated to a d-connection D on complex phase
space as a respective N-adapted map T V T VN T V
obeying the Leibniz rule when, for instance,

D( N ) = ( D N ) + 2 RN ( ) N RN ( D)  ,

for some 1-forms (d-covectors)  and . Here we note that for a scalar f we have Df = ef. The formulas for the covariant d-derivative can be considered for left and right d-operators acting on a
d-covector  (for simplicity, we consider only the cases with N -products),
-D  = D( e N ) =  D( e) N  +RN ( e) N RN ( e) = e  -  N .

Let us consider how similar formulas can be written for a d-vector A instead of a 1-form . Using (55),

we compute

 e A = -RN ( A) N e eRN ( ) = - e e  N A,

which means that such anomalous transforms can be compensated if

- D

and

- D

are

defined

with

changed

signs in front of . From a more axiomatic viewpoint (similar coordinate base conventions were introduced in [59, 12]), we can consider two consistent covariant d-derivatives

- D

A=

D(

A) =

e A +  N

A and

- D

A=(

A) D =

e A+

A N .

It should be noted that all above type expressions simplify if we use

- D

for

d-covectors

and

- D

for

d-vectors.

This convention is compatible with the contraction if we follow the rule that similarly to  and e the

covariant d-derivative acts without an R-matrix on respective products but such permutation matrices are

used for left and right covariant d-derivatives:

-

-

e( A N ) =  D A N  + 2 A N D 

= e( A N )+  ( A N ) N  - 2 A N (  N A) ;

=

-D( A N

) =

(

- D

A N

)+RN ( A) N 2

RN ( -D)  ;

-

-

-

= D( A N ) = A N  ( D)+ ARN ( D) N 2 RN ( ) .

32

Using corresponding labels, such formulas can be derived for N-adapted splitting respectively on T V and T V.

Directional covariant d-derivatives: The conventions for covariant d-derivatives are chosen in such forms that for not adapted coordinate bases
we obtain respective formulas from [59, 12] but also N-adapted formulas for torsion and curvature on various (non) commutative nonholonomic spaces [1, 2, 28, 29, 4, 3, 30, 32]. For instance, using N both in abstract and with N­adapted coefficients, we write

-

-

D X Y =

D

- X

Y:=

X N 

D Y = X N ( e Y) + ( XN Y) N 

= X N ( e Y) + XN Y,  N = X N ( e Y )N e+ X N Y N  N e
- N Fµ ( Xµ N e Y) N  N e .

(56)

Permutations of directional covariant d-derivatives via R-matrices can be computed using formulas (49),

D RN ( Y)RN ( X) = RN ( Y) N ( eRN ( Y))N e+ X N Y N  N e

- N Fµ ( Xµ N e Y) N  N e.

(57)

Such formulas can be written for any geometric data ( , , R, D, D-, -D) with coordinate frames .

3.1.2 N-adapted linear connections and quasi-Hopf structures The d-connection formalism introduced in previous subsection can be extended for d-tensors and differen-
tial forms on the AN ­bimodule VecN of d-vector fields and the ­bimodule VecN = VecN N (M, N ) as we considered in section 2.6.2.

Star d-connections as N-adapted linear maps: We define a star d-connection as a N-adapted linear map h

D :

VecN  VecN N 1, i. e. v  D v = v N  = (vi N i, va N a);

with h- c-splitting

D = ( hD, cD) : VecN = (hVecN , cVecN )  (hVecN , cVecN ) N ( h, c),

(58)

for v N   VecN N 1. We put a star label for D in order to distinguish this d-connection from D (54) introduces for a geometric nonholonomic formalism not involving Hopf d-algebras. For any element
a  AN and v VecN and respective associators, it is satisfied the right Leibniz rule,

D( v N a) = ( 1 D( 2v)) N 3 a + v N da.

(59)

In a more general context, the adjoint action of a d-vector   U VecF (M, N ) also results in a N-adapted
linear map D: VecN  VecN N 1, which is also a d-connection. This property exists for all types of d-connections in nonholonomic (non) commutative and/or nonassociative geometry.
The d-connection D (58) can be uniquely extended to a N-adapted covariant derivative for d-vector filed values in the exterior d-algebra VecN = VecN N , when

D d : VecN  Vec+N1, i. e. v N   ( 1 D( 2v))N 3 + v N d .

(60)

33

We can consider the action of covariant d-derivative along a d-vector field z  VecN using the pairing d-operator and respective associators,

Dz  = D , z N = ( v N ), z N = 1v N

2 ,

3 z

,
N

(61)

for any  = v N   VecN . These formulas can be used for defining and computing the covariant d-derivative,
Dz d  := D d , z N + D d , z N .
The d-operator D d satisfies in N-adapted form this graded right Leibnitz rule:

D d( N ) =

1 D

d(

2 )

N

3  + (-1)||

N

D d

.

In abstract geometric form, we can compute various star products of d-tensors and multiplications to elements of d-algebras, scalars etc. using respective (60) and (61), pairing d-operators and associators. For instance, we can consider Dz( v N a) as a generalization of the Leibniz rule (59). We omit such a tedious geometric calculus which in not N-adapted form is similar to formula (4.8) in [13]. In many cases, the constructions with quasi-Hopf algebras and respective nonassociative covariant calculus can be extended symbolically in N-adapted forms when (using notations from that work), for instance,   e,z  Dz and dz  D d. In our approach, this can be performed in a self-consistent geometric form using Convention 2 discussed in section 2.2.1.

N-adapted coefficient formulas for star deformed d-connections and their h- and v-splitting : For a star deformed d-connection (58), such coefficients D = {   AN } are computed using the
action of this d-operator on e and e following above geometric rules,

D e :=

e N , where

(62)

 =  N e is a star d-connection 1-form; in brief,  =  N e.

Introducing D e := D, we write

D e := = =

D e, e N = ( e N  ) N e N .

e N (  N e ) , e N e , e N = 1 ( e N  ) N

2 e , 3 e N

(63)

The d-connection coefficients  and respective 1-form  are used for computing N-adapted covariant derivatives:

D v = D d( e N ) =

e N ( d v +  N v), for d-vector v = e N v, v  AN ;

e N ( d  +  N ), for   .

(64)

For commutative N-adapted (co) frames e = ( ei, ea) (10), a d-connection is determined by h- and c-coefficients which can be parameterized in the form D = {  = ( Lijk, Labk, Cijc, Cab c)}, see details in Refs. [8, 9]. In a similar form, we define h-(c)v-components of a star deformed d-connection by introducing ei and eb in (63). For instance, Dk eb = ea N Lba k, which results in a h- and c-decomposition

D = {

 = ( Lijk,

Lba k,

Ci

c j

,

Cabc)}.

(65)

Similar N-adapted coefficients can be computed for star deformations of T TV and T TV.

34

Dual star d-connections : For quasi-Hopf d-structures, we can also consider left actions of covariant d-derivatives as in (56), which
can be formulated in terms of the dual star d-connection D which is different from D (58) defined without N-adapting to a quasi-Hopf d-algebra. Such d-connections are related via pairing of actions on a distinguished 1-form  and d-vector v,

D ,

v N = Dd D ,

v N -

1 ,

2 D( 3 v)

.
N

This defines a star d-connection on the dual N-adapted bimodule

D : 1  1 N 1.

(66)

Here we note that such a star d-connection acts from the right and from a formal point of view we should write ( ) D but following a convention from the bulk of former works one nonassociative geometry, we use D( ).
The d-operator D satisfies the left Leibniz rule,

D(a N ) = 1 a N 3D( 2 ) + Dda N , for a  AN ,   1,

and has a unique lift to this type of d-connection acting on ­bimodule VecN = VecN N  when

Dd :  N 1  +1 N 1.

We can compute the N-adapted coefficients of D = { } if we take  = e = ( ei, eb) and

v = e = ( ej, eb) from (10), when Dd e, coefficients for the star d-connection as in (62), when

e

N = Dd. We can consider the same N-adapted

D( e), e N = - e, D( e) N = - e, e N  N = -  , for D( e) = -  N e if we identify  = .
In a similar N-adapted form, for  =  N e  1, we can compute

D( ) = D(  N e) = -  N D( e) + d  N e = -  N  N e + d  N e
= ( d  -  N  ) N e.

These formulas result in

Dd(  N e) = ( d  - N ) N e.

Finally, we note that the d-operators D and Dd can be generalized in order to include in N-adapted form the U VecF (M, N )­equivariance property and/or to define d-connections on d-tensor products. In abstract geometric form, such constructions are elaborated in sections 4.2 and 4.3 of [13]. Respective N-adapted coefficient formulas can be derived for explicit actions on N-elongated (co) bases as we computed above.

3.2 Star generalizations of the torsion, Riemann and Ricci d-tensors
Considering a star deformed d-connection as a general affine (linear) connection on corresponding phase spaces and N-adapted tensor and star products, we can define and compute respective torsion and curvature d-tensors which are important for elaborating nonholonomic geometric and physical models. We show how such geometric constructions can be performed in abstract and N-adapted coefficient forms [12] and emphasize possible differences when quasi-Hopf d-algebra structures [13] are involved.

35

3.2.1 Definition of d-torsions
Abstract and N-adapted coefficient formulas for star d-torsions: A torsion d-tensor, d-torsion, is defined by formula10

T( X, Y) := D X Y - DRN ( Y)RN ( X) - [ X, Y]N ,

where we use a convention when, for instance, X and Y are next to each other and not separated by . Such formulas are consequences of (56) when, for instance, some missing terms like X N e Y = X( Y) are formally added and substituted.
For simplicity, we elaborate only on N-adapted constructions when

T :=

-D e = ( e  e) N T, where  =  e and T =  -  -

w  ,

(67)

when the anholonomy coefficients w = { Ciba = ea Nib, Cjia = ej Nia - ei Nja} are complex phase space analogs being defined and computed as in formulas (6) and (8).
Explicit computations of the d-torsion coefficients using formulas (48), (49) and (51) result in such Nadapted coefficients formulas:

T( X, Y) := =

X N X N

Y, T N e N = X N Y, ( e  e) N T N e N

Y - RN ( X) N RN ( Y), ( e 

e) N T N

e

.
N

The N-adapted coefficients of d-torsion come out from formulas

T( e, e), e N = T =  -  - w

(68)

as in (67). Such coefficients transform into holonomic ones considered for coordinate frames in [12], which in our notations are written with left labels " " for local coordinates on T V with vanishing anholonomy coefficients and when a N-connection structure is not distinguished,

T ( ,

),d

u

=

T

 

=

 -

  .

Introducing in formulas (68) the N-adapted (co) frames e = ( ei, ea) (10), we obtain a h-v-decomposition

for the coefficients of d-torsion,

T = { T = (

T

i jk

,

T

i j

a,

Taji,



Ta

b i

,

 Ta bc )},

with



T

i j

k

=

Lijk -

 Likj ,



T

i j

a

=

Cjia,

Taji = -

aji,

Tc

a j

=

Lcaj -

ea( Ncj), Tabc = Cabc - Cacb,

where D = {  = ( Lijk, Labk, Cijc, Cabc)}. We extract zero torsion configurations, for instance, for the Levi-Civita connection, (LC-connection,

we shall provide explicit formulas for respective nonassociative metric structures in next subsection), when

D  , if we impose the condition

T = 0,

(69)

where we put a left label  to such geometric d-objects in order to emphasize that they are defined by a LC-connection which is a linear connection but not a d-connection because it does not preserve a N-connection

10this is a standard definition in differential geometry by for nonassociative generalizations contains appropriate insertions of respective R -matrices and star products into standard formula on T V, when T(X, Y) := DXY - DYX - [X, Y]; we shall use below differential forms for defining and computing nonassociative star deformed torsion N-adapted coefficients which is more convenient if quasi-Hopf d-algebras are considered

36

splitting of type (4) under parallel transports. In differential geometry with multiple linear connections, there are used various types of distortion tensors. For instance, we can consider

D =  + Z,

(70)

where Z is a distortion d-tensor even  is not a d-tensor and may be not N-adapted. In coefficient Nadapted and/or coordinate forms, the coefficients or Z are certain algebraic transforms of coefficients of T. Explicit formulas depend on the type of frames and coordinates we consider. In general form, we write this through a linear functional Z[ T].

Star d-torsions for d-connections and quasi-Hopf structures :

Adapting geometric objects both to N-connection and Hopf algebraic structures result in additional non-

holonomy relations. This can be performed in a well defined geometric form if the concept of d-torsion is

introduced using N-adapted differential forms with coefficients taking values in Hopf d-algebra, see conven-

tions from subsections 2.6.2 and 3.1.2. In such an approach, a star deformed d-torsion of a star d-connection D (58) is defined as a N-adapted map with identity

T

 VecN N 2

e N e, N : VecN  VecN and expanded to any d-vector field v = e N v, v  AN , when the associator acts trivially on any basis (co) vector e = ( ei, ea) (10). Using Dd (64), we define and compute

T  := D d ( e N e) = D eN e = e N  N ( eN e)

:= e N T , where

T

 

:=

 N ( eN e) = (  -

 +

w ) N ( e N

e), for

[ e , e]N = eN e = e N e - e N e = w N e,

(71)

see (6) and (67). Similar formulas action of d-operators which results

can in a

be introduced dual d-torsion

for T

t=he{dual d}-.coInnnthecistiwonork,Dwe(6o6m) iwt istuhchinnvoenrsheoloorndoemr oicf

geometric constructions which can be performed in analogous forms.

Additionally, we can consider the star d-torsion as a N-adapted map T  : VecN N VecN  VecN , when
T ( z, v) = T , z N v N = e N T  , z N v N .

for some d-vectors z and v. There are satisfied the conditions of right AN ­linearity and star antisymmetry, i.e. T ( z, v) = - T ( v, z), where the braiding d-operator " ", equivalently

R( z N v) = ( v N z),

(72)

results in the properties

e N e, z N v N = eN e, z N v N =

e N e N

e, v N z N , and e, zN v N .

This proves the mentioned star antisymmetry but in N-adapted form (in coordinate frames with re-defined indices, such a proof is given by formulas (4.31) and (4.32) in [13]).11

11See also sections 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, and 4.4 in that work for an abstract tensor formalism in terms of homomorphic maps, this shows
that T is a d-tensor of type T  homN (VecN N VecN , VecN ). For N-connection structures, the abstract and component formulas must be considered both for h- and (c)v-components.

37

Acting with d-operator T  (71) on e = ( ei, ea) (10), we compute the d-torsion coefficients for z = e and v = e,

T ( e, e) = e N

T

 

,

eN

e N =

e N (  -

 +

w ) = e N

T, (73)

see (71). The h- and c-decomposition of d-torsion is stated in the form

T  = { T = ( Tijk,

Ti

a j

,

Taji, Tab i,

Tabc)}, by such N-adapted coefficients

Ti jk = Tca j =

Lijk -

Likj ,

Ti

a j

=

Ciaj ,

Taji = -

aji,

Lac j - ea( Ncj ), Tabc = Cabc - Cacb,

(74)

where D is determined by h-c-components as in formulas (65). The analogs of zero torsion conditions (69) and distortion relations (70) are derived respectively,

T =  -  + w = 0 and D = + Z.

With respect to a local coordinate basis  , we can write T =  -  = 0, which reflects the fact that such a linear connection  is not a d-connection because, in general, it is not adapted to a

N-connection splitting.

Using z = e,

v = e and

D =

De , we can calculate 

T ( e, e) = D e - D e + [ e, e]N = e N (  -  + w ).

Such formulas are equivalent to (73) and provide a proof for the 1st Cartan structure equation which can be written in abstract form for covariant d-derivatives and general two d-vectors z and v,

T ( z,

v) =

1

D
2

v

3 z -

1

D
2

z


3v + [

z,

v]N .

This d-operator is U VecF (M, N )-equivariant and can be written in terms of N-adapted associative composition ·, pairing and braiding R (72),

T (, ) = , N · D N id - , N · D N id · R + [, ]N ,

where

D N id ( z N

v) =

D(
1

z)
2

N

v,
3

T ( z N a, v) =

T ( 1z,2 a N

a  AN , and T ( z, v) = T ( z N v).

2v), for

3.2.2 Riemann (curvature) d-tensors
We proceed with star generalizations of the Riemann curvature d-tensor for d-connections. The formulas depend on the type of prescribed nonholonomic structure and how the geometric constructions are adapted to N-connections and which conventions are used for left and right covariant derivatives.

Definition of curvature d-tensor for covariant d-derivatives: For a d-connection D, we define the curvature R considering that it matches such geometric conditions:
1. It is a d-tensor12

R( X, Y, A) = ( D X · D Y - DRN ( Y) · DRN ( X) - D[ X, Y]N ) A

(75)

where · extends on T V and respective star products the composition (22) in certain forms which are compatible to directional covariant derivatives;

12we chose an inverse sign to that used in [12] in order to generalize our former works on nonholonomic gravity and FinslerLagrange-Hamilton models

38

2. this is a d-operator of type

R( X, Y, A) :=

XN Y N A, R N = 

XN Y , A N R N e N , (76)

3. it is also a 2-form with matrix coefficients which can be also constructed using the d-connection 1-form  = { } (67),

R = d  -    = e N R N e, where R = -D  = d  -   , for = eN e N  N e and  := e N  .

(77)

Let us explain how the composition · from point 1 can be constructed explicitly in a form which is

compatible with definitions of star curvature d-tensor and star involving consecutive d-operators: The first

2 and 3. We note that action can be written

D X Y encodes from the right as

two N-adapted - D = e + 

and the second one consists a contraction with X from the left (we denote it i X). We shall apply also an

associator  in order to construct brackets of X and Y. Following such conventions, we express

D X Y := =

(i

X)

- D

Y=

i

X( Y D-) =

i

X(

e

Y) +

i

X( Y N

)

X N ( e Y) + X N Y N 

and prescribe that the composition · is a composition of the left and right acting d-operators of type

D X · D Y A =

i X· i Y A

D- · D- .

To compute coefficient formulas of star Riemann d-tensors of type (75) we have to shift all basis d-vectors in (76) using formulas (36). For the operator  (33) this is described in details in Appendix B of [12]. That proof can be elaborated in a similar abstract geometric and/or in N-adapted coefficient forms for d-connections.13

N-adapted coefficient formulas of the curvature d-tensor: Here we provide formulas for the curvature d-form (77) and some important coefficients in N-adapted bases,

R = e N e  e N e  - µ N µ - N F   e µ N µ N e

when

R  := R( e, e, e ), e N = e   - e   + µ  N µ - µ  N µ

+   N w + N F  e µ  N µ - N F  e µ  N µ.

(78)

In these formulas, the anholonomy coefficients are computed as in (8) but on T V, when

w = { wiba = ea Nib, wjia = ej Nia - ei Nja}.

Using N-adapted (co) frames e = ( ei, ea) (10) in (78), we can compute the h-v-components of the Riemannian d-tensor for a star d-connection D. We provide such a calculus in next subsection, with an additional adapting to quasi Hopf d-structures which is used for formulating nonassociative generalizations of
the Einstein equations in section 4.

13We do not provide formulas for Bianchi type identities for star torsion and curvature d-tensors of d-connection D (53) which are considered in holonomic nonassociative forms in [12] and for commutative nonholonomic geometries, for instance, in [8, 9]; for quasi-Hopf d-structures with d-connection D (58) we derive Bianchi identities in next subsection.

39

3.2.3 Star deformed curvature of quasi-Hopf N-adapted structures
We extend for d-connections and N-adapted frames the definitions and formulas the star deformed curvature d-tensors. For holonomic basic structures such constructions are provided in section 4.5 of [13].

Abstract definition of the curvature d-tensor and N-adapted differential forms: We define the curvature of a N-adapted covariant derivative Dd (60) by d-operator

 := D d· D d : VecN  VecN N 2.

(79)

This d-operator defines a d-tensor which is AN ­linear and determined by a star d-connection D (58). It is also U VecF (M, N )-equivariant and can be written in terms of N-adapted associative composition ·, pairing and braiding R (72), and associator ,

 :=

, N · ( D N id) · ( , N N id) · -V 1ecN N 1,V ecN ,V ecN · ( D N id2N )

·(id3N - id R R) + , N · D N id · (id R [, ]N ).

(80)

Acting with d-operator  (79) on e and using respective associators and formulas (62) and (63), we compute:

( e) =

1 D

d·

D d(

e)

=

D d(

D

e) =

D d( e N

)

= 1 D(2 e)N 3  + e N d  = ( e N  )N  + e N d 

= 1 e N ( 2  N 3 ) + e N d  = e N (  N ) + e N d 

= e N ( d  +  N ) := e N R ,

where we introduce the matrix valued (describing a Hopf d-algebra) star deformed d-curvature 2-form

  := d  + N .

(81)

This formula is a star deformed differential form expression of the curvature d-operator (80).

Nonassociative Bianchi identities and Hopf-Cartan structure equations:

Taking the exterior derivative of the torsion 2-form

T

 

(67)

we

prove

the

1st

Bianchi

identity,

d

T  +

 N

T

 

=

 ,

and similar action on R  (81) provides a proof for the 2d Bianchi identity,

d   +  N   -  N   =  N (  µN µ )- 1 N ( 2 µN 3 µ ) = 0, nonassociative; = 0 associative.

The d-operator R (80) is a fourth rank d-tensor which also satisfies in abstract form the second Cartan structure equation. We omit such considerations in this work because they are similar to those in the holonomic form (see formula (4.55) in [13]). Nevertheless, we provide an equivalent N-adapted coefficient version of such an equation which can be obtained from a geometric calculus of the d-operator R( z, v, q) as an action

40

on basis d-vectors z = e, v = e and q = e using the braiding d-operator (72). The corresponding computations are as follow

eµ N

D ( D e) - D( D e) + D[ e , e]N e = D( D e) - D( D e) + [ e, e]N e =
D( eµ N µ ) - D( eµ N µ ) + eµ N wµ e = D( eµ N µ ) - D( eµ N µ ) + eµ N wµ e =
D eµ, e N N µ - D eµ, e N N µ + d µ, e N - eµ N d µ , e N + eµ N wµ e =

(82) ( e, e, e).

For holonomic basic structures such constructions are provided in section 4.5 of [13].

N-adapted coefficient formulas for the nonassociative Riemann d-tensor and quasi-Hopf dalgebras:
One extracts N-adapted formulas for the star deformed curvature d-tensor of D stated in (82) using   (81), star pairing and with respect to e (10),



( e, e , e) = eµ N µ , e N e N

= eµ N d µ + µ N , e N e N

(83)

= eµ N ( e µ N e )N e + ( µ N e)N (  N e), e N e N = eµ N e µ N ( e N e) +

µ N (  + iR  e) N e N e, e N e N = eµ N µ  ,

where  is the Kronecker delta symbol. In this formula, we use the N-adapted coefficients of the nonassociative Riemann d-tensor for the quasi-Hopf d-algebra written in the form

µ  =

1µ  + 2µ  , where 1µ  = e µ - e µ + µ N (  - 
2µ  = i µ N (R   e  - R   e  ).

 ) +

w  N

(84) µ

With respect to e = ( ei, ea) (10) and for

 = (

Lij k ,

Lba k,

Ci

c j

,

Ci

c j

)

(65),

we

find

such

a h-c-decomposition:

1 = { 1µ  = ( 1Rihjk,

1Rba jk,

1Pi

a hj

,

1Pcb ja,

1Si hba,

1Sc bea)}, where

(85)

1Rihjk =

1Rba jk =

1Pi

a hj

=

1Pcb

a k

=

1Si j bc =

1Sa bcd =

ek Lihj - ej Lihk + Lmhj N

Limk -

Lmhk N

Limj -

Ci

a h

N

akj ,

ek L´ba j - ej L´ba k + L´bc j N L´ca k - L´bc k N L´ca j - Cabc N ckj,

ea Li jk -

Dk N

C´i

a j

+

C´i

b j

N

Tbka,

ea L´bc k - Dk N Ccba + Cc bd N Tc ka,

ec

C´i

b j

-

eb C´i j c +

C´j

b h

N

C´i

c j

-

C´j h c N

C´i j b,

ed Ca bc - ec Ca bd + Ce bc N Ca ed - Ce bd N Ca ec.

(86)

41

In these formulas, there are involved nonassociative d-torsion coefficients (74) and the nonholonomic distributions and respective N-adapted frames considered in (84). The coefficients (86) transform into respective N-adapted coefficients of commutative Riemann d-tensor, see details in [8, 9].
In a similar form, introducing N-adapted coefficients (10) and (65), we can compute h-v-decompositions of 2µ . We do not provide such formulas because they are not used in this and related series of works on nonassociative geometry and gravity.
Finally, we note that the nonassociative Riemann d-tensor (84) is constructed for an arbitrary star deformed d-connection D (58). This defines a model of nonassociative geometry of affine (linear) connections adapted to quasi-Hopf structures with N-connection.

3.2.4 Star deformed Ricci d-tensors without and with quasi-Hopf structure
For elaborated nonassociative nonholonomic geometric models, the Ricc tensor is the trace of respective Riemann tensor. In N-adapted form, we work with d-tensors. In general, such a second rank Ricci d-tensor is not symmetric. It is a d-object which be adapted both to N-connection and quasi-Hopf structures.

Abstract definitions and N-adapted coefficients for star deformed Ricci d-tensors: Using the curvature d-tensor (75), we define the star deformed Ricci d-tensor

Ric := R( X, Y, e), e N .

For N-adapted bases with when

X = e and Y = e, this mean that we contract the first and forth indices Ric = { R := R}, for R = R.

We compute the N-adapted coefficients R is explicit form using formulas (78),

R   := e   - e   + µ  N µ - µ  N µ +   N w + N F  e µ  N µ - N F  e µ  N µ.

(87)

Considering a h-c-splitting for e and , we find such a N-adapted decomposition of (87)

R  := { R hj = Rihji, Pja = - Riji a, Pkb = Rcbkc, Sbc = Sabca},

(88)

see similar associative and commutative formulas in (A1) of references [8, 9]. For star deformed nonholonomic
configurations, we have to identify and summarize on respective h- and c-indices, use the star product N and consider additional contributions of terms proportional to N F . We omit such details in this work and consider below a similar N-adapted calculus with quasi Hopf d-objects which allow us to compute the
coefficients of star deformed Ricci d-tensors.

The star deformed Ricci d-tensor for quasi-Hopf N-adapted structures:

The Ricci d-tensor for nonholonomic and noncommutative models was studied in our previous works [1, 2,

3, 4], see also parts II and III of monograph [61]. In this subsection, we provide definitions and computations

extending the nonholonomic geometric approach for nonassociative star deformations of the Ricci tensor

on quasi-Hopf structures generalizing the constructions from and references therein. Using star curvature

d-operator (80), we define

ic( z, v) := ( z, v, e) , e N ,

for any d-vectors z, v  VecN and N-adapted (co) frames e and e, see (10). This states that we can contract the first and forth indices in a N-adapted decomposition of a star Riemann d-tensor in order to

compute the coefficients of a respective star Ricci d-tensor.

42

The N-adapted coefficients of the star Ricci d-tensor are computed following formulas

ic =

Ric N ( e N e), where Ric := ic( e, e ) = Ricµ N ( eµ N e ), eN e N .

(89)

For ( e, e, e) (83) and using the property that the associator acts trivially on basis d-vectors and N-adapted forms (and contracting respective indices in (84)), we calculate explicitly

Ric =

µ µ = 1Ric + 2Ric , for 1Ric = 1µ µ and 2Ric = 2µ µ.

The h- and c-decompositions are computed by introducing in these formulas e = ( ei, ea) (10) and

 = (

Lij k ,

Lba k,

Ci

c j

,

Ci

c j

)

(65)

as

in

(85).

Such computations are similar to (88) and

associative and commutative formulas in (A1) of references [8, 9]). We express the result as

Ric = { R hj =

i hj i ,

Pja = -

i

a ji

,

Pb k =

bc

c k

,

Sbc

= baca }.

(90)

It is possible to decompose this d-tensor in powers of iR,

Ric = (i)0 [0]Ric + (i)1 [1]Ric - 2 [2]Ric ,

where the term [0]Ric contains certain nonassociative and noncommutative contributions from star products of type (13) or (16) and their generalizations for quasi-Hopf structures. Formulas (4.83) in [13] provide a
holonomic version of such a decomposition on powers of .14 We can chose such nonholonomic distributions on a curved nonholonomic phase space M when [0]Ric| 0,0 = Ric is the Ricci d-tensor for a real nonholonomic cotangent Lorentz bundle T V. For nontrivial [1]Ric and [2]Ric , a nonassociative and/or noncommutative M is a complex cotangent manifold with geometric d-objects determined by string contributions and adapted both to the N-connection and quasi-Hopf algebra structure. A d-connection  is, in general, with a nonzero torsion. We can extract various types of real or complex configurations by imposing
self-consistent nonholonomic constraints, or to consider limits of small parameters  0 and/or   0 for
certain well-defined smooth conditions.

3.3 (Non) symmetric star deformed d-metrics and quasi-Hopf structures
In (pseudo) Riemannian geometry and gravity theories constructed with (modified) Lagrangians on a Lorentz manifold V , the metric g = {g}  T V  T V is considered as a fundamental geometric object defining respectively the gravitational field. For a nontrivial N-connection structure g on V, such a metric field can be transformed into a d-metric, i.e. into a symmetric metric d-tensor with conventional h- and v-splitting, g = (hg, vg) = {g = (gij, gab)}, when the coefficients are computed with respect to a N-adapted dual basis e  T TV (5). To elaborate geometric models on real and/or complex phase spaces, respectively, on M = TV and/or M = TV, we follow the Convention 2 and consider d-tensors g = (h g, c g) = { g = (gij, gab)}, when the coefficients are computed respect to tensor products of e  T TV (7) and g = (h g, c g) = { g = (gij, gab)}, with coefficients computed with respect to tensor products of e  T TV (10). Nonassociative star deformations of such commutative metrics can be elaborated
14From a formal geometric point of view, we can generalize those formulas considering that   e and the nontrivial Nconnection structure results in non-zero anholonomy coefficients w . In our works, we consider nonholonomic structures which allows us to apply the AFCDM. This method does not work in a straightforward form for the nonassociative models elaborated in [12, 13] because the gravitational equations formulated in coordinate bases do not decouple in a general form.

43

in a N-adapted form generalizing all constructions from [12, 13]. The main issue of such nonassociative generalizations is that star deformations, for instance, on tensor products T TV N T TV result both in
symmetric , g = (h g, c g) = { g = g = ( gij = gji, gab = gba)}, and (91) nonsymmetric , g = (h g, c g) = { g = ( gij = gji, gab = gba) = g},
d-metric structures. In coordinate bases, when e  e = d u  T T V , such star deformed metric structures are denoted respectively in generic off-diagonal

symmetric , g = { g = g}, and nonsymmetric , G = { G = G},

(92)

metric structures. For a fixed N-connection and respective coordinate structures, we have g = g and, respectively, g = G, but with different block (4 × 4) + (4 × 4) and 8 × 8 matrices of coefficients when N-adapted, or local coordinate (co) frame decompositions are considered. In this and next sections, we shall follow the approach with quasi-Hopf d-algebras because allows to elaborate on a N-adapted diffeomorphisms and star deformations which allows more straightforward quantum generalizations. For instance, we use the symbol G for nonsymmetric metrics as in Section 5 of [13] reconsidering the formulas in N-adapted form and with boldface symbols and labels N, , etc. In a similar form, we can preform a nonholonomic generalization of the formulas from Section 6 of [12] using a corresponding abstract geometric calculus and re-definition of nonholonomic structures as we distinguished in previous sections. We omit in this and next sections dubbing of nonassociative constructions for different nonholonomic distributions determining different parameterizations of symmetric and nonsymmetric metric structures.
The goal of this subsection is to study main properties of (non) symmetric metric and related linear connection structures which are generated by N-adapted star deformations to quasi-Hopf structures on phase spaces M = TV.

3.3.1 The geometry of phase space commutative metrics and canonical d-connections A d­metric g on TV is a symmetric d-tensor

g = g(x, p) e e = g(x, p)d ud u,

(93)

which can be parameterized via frame transforms, g = e e g in off-diagonal forms, for instance, with respect to local coordinate dual basis d u,

g =

gij(x) + gab(x, p) Nia(x, p) Njb(x, p) gbe Nie(x, p)

gae Nje(x, p) gab(x, p)

(94)

Using a d-metric g, we can work in equivalent form with two different linear connections:

( g, N) 

: D:

 g = 0; T = 0, for the LC­connection D g = 0; h T = 0, c T = 0, hc T = 0, for the canonical d­connection ,

(95)

where D = (h D, c D), with covertical splitting, is a d-connection adapted to a N­connection structure N. The LC-connection  is not a d-connection because it does not preserve the N-connection splitting under parallel transports. For such linear connections, we can define and compute in standard forms respective torsions, T = 0 and T , and curvatures, R = { R} and R = { R}, which can be defined and computed in coordinate free and/or coefficient forms with respect to arbitrary, coordinate, and/or N-adapted frames. Even  is not a d-connection, there is a canonical distortion relation which is N-adapted,

D =  + Z.

(96)

44

The distortion d-tensor, Z = { Z[ T]}, is an algebraic combination of the coefficients of the corresponding torsion d-tensor T = { T} of D. This distortion is determined by the N-connection coefficients and anholonomy coefficients w, see similar formulas (8).
For such linear connections determined by a metric structure, we can define and compute respective Ricci tensors. For instance, the canonical Ricci Ricci d-tensor is Ric = { R  := R} and, for the LCconnection, Ric = { R  := R} (we may omit the label  writing formulas in not "boldface" forms if such formulas do not result in ambiguities). The canonical d-tensor Ric is characterized by h -c N-adapted coefficients,

R = { Rij := Rkijk, Ria := - Rkika, Rai := Rba i b, Rab := Rc abc}.

(97)

Respectively, there are two different scalar curvatures, R := g R = gij Rij + gab Rab and R := g R.
We conclude that we can construct a standard (pseudo) Riemannian commutative geometry and/or a nonholonomic model with nonholonomic induced torsion by the N-connection structure on TV. This can
be described equivalently by two different geometric data ( g, ) and ( g, N, D). Using the canonical distortion relation (96), we can compute respective distortions of geometric objects and certain important geometric/ physical equations, for instance, of curvature and Ricci tensors,

R = R+ Z and Ric = Ric + Zic,

(98)

with corresponding distortion tensors Z and Zic. We provide here the N-adapted coefficients of canonical d-connection TV (see similar proofs for TV in
[8, 9]):

T TV, D = {  = ( Lijk, Labk, Cijc, Cijc)}, for [ g = ( gjr, gab), N = { Nai}],

Lijk

=

1 2

gir( ek gjr +

ej

gkr -

er gjk),

Labk =

eb(

Nak )

+

1 2

gac(

ek

gbc -

gdc

eb Ndk - gdb

ec Ndk),

C

ic j

=

1 2

gik

ec

gj k ,

C

bc a

=

1 2

gad( ec gbd +

eb gcd -

ed gbc).

(99)

By straightforward computations with such coefficients, we can check that there are satisfied all necessary conditions from the definition of the canonical d-connection in (95). Introducing (99) in formulas (97) and (98), we can compute respective N-adapted and h-/c-components,for the canonical Ricci d-tensor, corresponding Ricci scalars and distortions.
In our partner works, we prove that using nonassociative extensions of the canonical d-connection, for certain well defined nonholonomic configurations, various types of gravitational and matter field equations rewritten in nonholonomic variables ( g, N, D) can be decoupled and integrated in some general forms.15 This motivates our approach with two linear connections structures (95). In similar forms, we can consider another type d-connection structure D (for a general d-connection, we omit the "hat" symbol) and compute respective d-connection N-adapted coefficients, d-curvature etc. If D g = Q = 0, (we note that by definition Q = 0, i.e. the canonical d-connection is metric compatible) we have to work with a so-called nonmetricity d-tensor Q adapted to a N-connection structure as in Parts II and III of [61] for nonholonomic metric-affine

15We emphasize that it is not possible to decouple the gravitational and filed equations, and geometric flow equations, for generic off-diagonal metrics if we work from the very beginning with the data g,  . Following our works (see also references therein), we apply the strategy that having constructed certain classes of generalized solutions (following the AFCDM), necessary
type LC-configurations can be extracted if the condition T = 0 is imposed at the end.

45

and generalized Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton spaces in commutative and noncommutative geometries. Formulas

from this subsection can be similarly introduced for real tangent and contangent Lorentz bundles, TV and

TV, with corresponding canonical geometric data (g, N, e, ,D = +Z) and ( g, N, e, , D = + Z).

We note that the star deformation of geometric and physical models following Convention 1 is based on

extensions

( g,

, 

)  ( , A, g, G,

, D =  + Z)

as in [12, 13]. On a target star deformed phase space, we can elaborate on nonassociative geometric models

when the geometric objects are described by coefficients and equations defined with respect to d u and  when there are possible different models of nonassociative covariant calculus. In general, the AFCDM can not

applied for physically important systems of nonlinear PDEs encoding of geometric and physical objects.

In this and next sections, for prescriptions of Convention 2 on N-adapted star deformations, we work with

( g, N, e, D =  + Z)  (N , AN , g, g, N, e, D =  + Z).

In such cases, we transform nonholonomic curved tangent Lorentz bundles into nonassociative nonholonomic phase spaces with complex momentum like coordinates.

3.3.2 Nonassociative Levi Civita connections and canonical d-connections

Let us study metric aspects of nonassociative nonholonomic differential geometry and how to construct star deformations of the LC-connections and canonical d-connections on phase spaces with N-adapted quasi-Hopf structures. A star metric symmetric d-tensor is taken in the form g (91). It can be represented as

g = g N ( e N e )  1 N 1

with real-valued N-adapted coefficients g( e, e) = g = g  AN because of the property

g( z, v) = g( v, z) for all z, state the d-metric compatibility with

v VecN when the a star d-connection

braiding D (58)

d-operator "  " by the condition

is defined by (72).

We

D g = 0.

(100)

Nonsymmetric metrics and d-metrics and their inverses: For nonassociative phase space, we introduce a nonsymmetric metric (92) in generic off-diagonal form with
respect to a local coordinate base,

G = g - iR    g .

(101)

In N-adapted form with respect to e, such a nonsymmetric d-metric structure (91) is parameterized

g = g - iR   e g ,

(102)

where R  and R  are related by a star nonsymmetric generalization of (93) with respective frame transforms,
g = g N ( e N e) = G  ( d u  d u),
where g = g and G = G. Such nonsymmetric d-metric and metric structures are nondegenerate and can be sought as R-flux corrected "effective metrics" from string theory. For quasi-Hopf configurations, we should consider the formalism of constructing inversions of matrices in A, see details in section 5.2 of [13]. We can compute the inverse matrix G-1 = { G} of the matrix G = { G} as a solution of algebraic equations G · G = G· G = . In compact symbolic matrix form, we can write

G-1 = (I + i g-1R g)-1 g-1,

46

where I is the 4 × 4 unity matrix, R g = R   g , the symmetric matrix g-1 = { g } is the inverse

of symmetric g = { g }. Such matrix representations of formulas are understood as geometric series, when,

for instance,

G = g - i g Rµ  (µ g) g + O(2).

(103)

For any star like product , we can compute G-1 = { G} as the -inverse of the matrix G = { G} as a solution of star like equation G  G = G G = , where ·   for a star associated to and which can be different from the -product. Such equations define, for instance, power series on ,



G = G +

G  (I- G  G-1)m .

m=1

(104)

Similar formulas can be written in block (2 × 2) × (2 × 2) forms for matrices constructed from N-adapted coefficients of a nonsymmetric star d-metric g and, respectively, of a symmetric star d-metric g.

Star deformed LC-connection and canonical d-connection: We define star deformations of the two linear connections structure (95) using a star d-metric g and work
in equivalent forms with respective two different linear connections:

 

 :

( g, N)   D :

 g = 0; T  = 0, for the star LC­connection ; D g = 0; h T  = { Ti jk} = 0, c T  = { Tabc} = 0, hc T  = 0,
for the star canonical d­connection .

(105)

In these formulas, the nonassociative metric compatibility is given respectively as in (100) and the star dtorsion components are parameterized as in formulas (74), when

T  = { T = ( Tijk = 0, Ti ja, Taji, Tab i, by such N-adapted coefficients with such imposed nonholonomic conditions

Tabc = 0)},

Ti jk = Tca j =

Lijk -

Likj = 0,

Ti

a j

=

Ciaj ,

Taji = -

aji,

Lac j - ea( Ncj), Tabc = Cabc - Cacb = 0.

We can consider a set of N-adapted Christoffel symbols

(106)

[0] = g [0] = ( [0]Lijk = gim [0]Lmjk, [0]Lakb = gac [0]Lbc k, [0]Cij c = gim [0]Cmjc, [0]Cbec = gae [0]Cb ec),

where h-c-components are similar to (99) with e = ( ei, ea) (10), and N = { Nai} but with star labels for g = ( gjr, gab) (91),

[0]Lijk

=

1 2

(

ek

gji +

ej gki -

ei gjk),

[0]Lakb =

gac

eb(

Nck) +

1 2

(

ek

gba -

gda eb Ndk - gdb ea Ndk),

[0]Cij c =

1 2

ec

gij ,

[0]Cbec

=

1 2

(

ec

gbe +

eb gce -

ee

gbc).

(107)

It is possible to introduce

[1]µ

=

1 2

R

µ

(

e

e g +

e e g )

(108)

47

and define the N-adapted coefficients of the star canonical d-connection D = { }, where

 = [0] + i [1] = (

Lij k ,

Lba k,

Ci

c j

,

Cabc)

(109)

are parameterized in the form (65) and (for the nonsymmetric d-metric g (102)) subjected to the condition

e N g  N  = e N ( [0]  + i [1]  ).

(110)

In these formulas, the h-c components of [0] are determined by (107) and [1]µ(108) can be computed with h- and c-compositions of g .
In a local coordinate basis  , the equations (110) for the LC-connection  = { } can be written in the form

G 



=

1 2

 g +  g -  g + iR (   g +   g ) ,

where the off-diagonal nonsymmetric metric G is computed as in (101). Such a formula is equivalent to (5.13) in [13] and allow to extract the coefficients  with respect to local coordinate dual frames. Changing   e, we can compute N-adapted coefficients of  and nonassociative star deformation of

the canonical distortion relation (96),

D =  + Z.

(111)

The distortion d-tensor, Z = { Z[ T]}, is an algebraic combination of the coefficients of the nonas-

sociative canonical d-tensor T = { T} with h- c-components (106) computed using formulas (107). We conclude that we can describe any model of nonassociative phase geometry determined by a non-

symmetric d-metric structure g = g - iR  e g (for any prescribed N-connection structure and R-flux, we can consider only the symmetric d-metric g) can be described equivalently in terms of

the star LC-connection  and/or the canonical d-connection D. For any nonholonomic configuration

determined by geometric data ( g, D), we can extract nonassociative LC-configurations imposing zero torsion conditions

Z = 0, which is equivalent to D| T=0 = .

(112)

Even such conditions are satisfied for certain geometric models, the anholonomy coefficients w may be not zero, see similar formulas (8), which means that we work with general nonholonomic frames and involved (non) symmetric metrics are generic off-diagonal (i.e. can not be diagonalized by coordinate transforms on a finite spacetime or phase space region) if we re-write them with respect to local coordinate frames.

Decompositions on small parameters of nonassociative d-metric/ -connection coefficients:

For nonassociative geometry with quasi-Hopf structures, such coordinate frame formulas for the (non)

symmetric metrics and LC-connections with small parameters and  are provided in section 5.3 of [13]. All

nonassociative coefficient formulas from that work can be re-written in N-adapted for two linear connection

structures (105) using such direct or inverse nonholonomic transforms and canonical distortions (111) of

geometric data:

( , G , )  ( e, w, g, D =  + Z),

(113)

where certain new terms of the d-curvature and d-torsion, and Ricci d-tensor, additionally to those with  (which are holonomic) appear for frame transforms to nonholonomic N-adapted frames e and their nontrivial anholonomy coefficeints w. We provide here certain important formulas which show the nonassociative geometric formalism is different for holonomic and nonholonomic structures.

48

The formulas (101) and (103) for the nonsymmetric off-diagonal metric and it inverse metric can be written respectively in the form

G = g - iR   g := G[0] + G[1] () and G = g - i g Rµ  ( µ g) g + O(2) := G[0] + G[1] () + O(2), G = 2 G - G  G  G + O( 2), in this case, we follow the rules (104).

(114)

This allow to derive formulas which are parametric on and  and can be written in generic off-diagonal and/or N-adapted forms. We introduce

W = gµ  + iR    g := W[0]  + W[1]  (),

(115)

where | ,=0 =  can be considered as the coefficients of the commutative LC-connection  in (95). Such formulas are written with respect to coordinate basis but we can also consider arbitrary frame transforms. For nontrivial and , we work with a nonassociative  from (105).
The techniques of decomposition on small parameters used in (114) and (115) can be extended in a similar to canonical data ( g, D) following Convention 2 and rule (113), working in N-adapted (co) bases. Up to first order on and first order on , we express conventionally

g = g - iR  e g := g[0] + g[1] () and g = g - i g Rµ  ( eµ g) g + O(2) := g[0] + g[1] () + O(2), g = 2 g - g  g  g + O( 2),

(116)

with possible h- and c-splitting of the star d-metric g (102) by the N-connection structure. We introduce also

W = gµ  + iR   e g := W[0]  + W[1] (),

(117)

which are related via star canonical distortion formulas (111) to similar d-objects (115). It should be noted that W transforms into W if there are imposed the zero torsion conditions (112).
We can the formalism of Section 5.2 of [13] on decomposition of the coefficients of metrics and linear connections with on parameters and  in N-adapted form for the star d-metrics and canonical d-connections. The coordinate formulas for the LC-connections presented in that work (formulas (5.55)-(5.65)) can be reconsidered in N-adapted bases and than distorted following (106). Here we present only the abstract geometric decomposition of the mentioned quantum and string parameters but omit cumbersome explicit coefficient formulas (they will be not used for constructing solutions and quantization of nonassociative theories in our future works) parameterizations. For the nonsymmetric d-metric, we write(116) in the form

g[0] = g[00] + g[01]( ) + O( 2, 2) and g[1] = g[10]() + g[11]( ) + O( 2, 2),

(118)

where g[00] = g ,

g[01]

=

i 2

(

n+i

g

ei g - ei g n+i g ) g , for

n+i = 

 pn+i

,

g[10] = iR   g ( e gµ ) gµ ,

49

g[11] =

 2

R





{(

e

gµ )[ g

gµ ( ei

g

n+i g -

n+i g

ei g )

+ g g( ei gµ n+i g - n+i gµ ei g )

+( ei g n+i gµ - n+i g ei gµ )]

-( ei e g )( g n+i g - g n+i g )

+( n+i e g )( g ei g - g ei g )} + O( 2, 2).

We can organize the nonholonomic frame structure (12) in such a form when for e   (and, inversely, following the Convention 2, above formulas transform in coordinate basis analogs of respective formulas (5.59)
- (5.61) from [13]. Using these formulas and (117) for g = g[0] + g[1] , g = g[0] + g[1] and  (110), we
express

[0] = [1] =

g[0]  W[0]  := [00] + [01] ( ) + O( 2), g[0]  W[1]  + g[1]  W[0]  := [10]() + [11]( ) + O( 2),

(119)

where

[00] =

 ,

[01]

=

-

i 2

g ( ei g n+i  - n+i

g

ei ),

(120)

[10] = iRn+i n+j n+k ( gn+k gjm( ei m) - gµ pn+j( ek gµ )( ei  )),

[11]

=

i

 2

Rn+i

n+j

n+k {-(

el

gn+k )

n+l[

ei(

gjm

m )]

+( n+l g n+k)[ el( ei gjm m )]

+[( el g )( n+l g ) - ( n+l g )( el g )] gn+k( ei gjm m )

+ el[ gn+k gqm( ei gqj )] n+l( gmo o )

- n+l[( gn+k gqm( ei gqj)] el( gmo o)

-( ei gqj )[ gn+k ( el g )( n+l g ) - ( n+l g )( el g ) q

+ gn+k ( el g )( n+k g ) - ( n+k g )( el g ) 

+ ( el gn+k)( n+l gµ ) - ( n+k gn+k)( el gµ ) g ]

+( el ei gqj )[( gn+k)( n+l gqs) gsp p - ( n+l gn+k) q] -( n+l ei gqj )[( gn+k)( el gqs) gsp p - ( el gn+k) q] +pn+j[ el g ( ek gµ) n+l( ei µ) - n+l g ( ek gµ)

el( ei

µ )]

+pn+j g ( ek gµ) ei [ ( el gµ ) n+l( g  ) - ( n+l gµ ) el( g  )

- ( el gµ )( n+l g ) - ( n+l gµ )( el g ) ]

+pn+j ( el g )( n+l ek gµ) - ( n+l g )( el ek gµ) ( ei µ)

-pn+j ( el g )( n+l ek g) - ( n+l g )( +( el g )( ej gµ)( ek µ )},

el g)

g( ek gµ)( ei µ)

50

where, for instance, the respective nontrivial c-component of a d-metric is computed in the form gn+k =

( gib = 0, gab), for b = n + k. Above formulas are for the canonical d-connection D (111). They can be transformed into formulas for the nonassociative LC-connection for zero distortion d-tensors when

D
|

T=0

=

, see (112). If necessary, we state the nonholonomic frame structure (12) in such a form when

for e   (and, inversely, following the Convention 2). This results in coordinate basis formulas (5.62)

- (5.65) from [13].

All components can be subjected to h- and c-decompositions with respect to e and e (10), when [00] =  from (95) with associative canonical d-connection h- and c-coefficients (99). We omit such h- and c-terms for other components in (119).

Nonassociative canonical Riemann and Ricci d-tensors for quasi-Hopf structures: In "hat" nonholonomic variables, the formula (84) defines the N-adapted coefficients of the nonassociative
canonical Riemann d-tensor,

µ  =

1µ  + 2µ  , where 1µ  = e µ - e µ + µ N (  -   ) + and 2µ  = i µ N (R   e  - R   e  ).

w  N

(121) µ

Using (109), we write

 = [0] + i [1] = [00] + [01] ( ) + [10]() + [11] ( ) + O( 2, 2, ...) and decompose (121) as

µ  = [00]µ  + [01]µ  ( ) + [10]µ  () + [11]µ  ( ) + O( 2, 2, ...).

We can fix such nonholonomic distributions on M = TV when [00]µ  is a "hat" variant of (84) with h- and c-coefficients (86). The explicit formulas for the terms up till order ,  and  and their h- and
c-decompositions are quite cumbersome and we omit such technical results in this paper. Contracting on the fist and forth indices above formulas for µ and respective h- and c-decompositions
we define the nonassociative canonical Ricci d-tensor as a "hat" variant of (89),

ic =

Ric N ( e N e), where Ric := ic( e, e ) = Ricµ N ( eµ N e ), eN e N .

The respective parametric decompositions are of type

(122)

Ric = where

µ µ = [00]Ric + [01]Ric ( ) + [10]Ric () + [11]Ric ( ) + O( 2, 2, ...),

[00]Ric = [00]µ µ , [01]Ric = [01]µ µ,

(123)

[10]Ric = [10]µ µ, [11]Ric = [11]µ µ.

We present here the explicit N-adapted formulas for such coefficients:

[00]Ric = R =

Ric = e  - e  + µ µ - µ µ + wµ µ,

see (97) on further h-c-decompositions.

(124)

51

The order contribution to star deformations of the Ricci d-tensor for the canonical d-connection is

[01]Ric = e [01] - e [01] + [01]µ µ + µ [01]µ

- [01]µ µ - µ [01]µ + wµ [01]µ

+

i 2

[(

el

µ)(

n+l

µ) - ( n+l

-

i 2

[(

el

µ )( n+l

µ) - ( n+l

µ)( el µ )] µ)( el µ)].

(125)

Inserting formulas for coefficients of type [01] (120), we can complete computation of such terms (we omit such cumbersome formulas with h-c-splitting, and similar ones with labels [1,0], [1,1] etc., because they
will be not used in this and partner works). Using respectively [00] =  and [10] from (119) and (120), we compute the order  of the
nonassociative Ricci d-tensor

[10]Ric = e [10] - e [10] + [10]µ µ + µ [10]µ

- [10]µ µ - µ [10]µ + wµ [10]µ

(126)

+iRn+i b n+k pb[( ek µ)( ei µ) - ( ek µ )( ei µ)]

-iRn+i n+j n+kk µi( ej µ)

+iRn+i n+j aa [ ej e i - ( ej µi) µ + ( ej µ ) µi + µ ( ej µi)],

where, for instance, k and a are Kronecker symbols. Terms (125) and (126) for the star deformed Ricci d-tensor are imaginary and they preserve such a property for zero torsion distortions to LC-configurations, for instance, for holonomic geometric models similar to that elaborated in [13]. Without additional assumptions on the type of physical models we elaborate on phase space and for projections on base spacetime configurations, we can not speculate on possible gravitational and matter field effects of R-fluxes. If we consider on total phase space nonholonomic Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton variables which can be transformed equivalently in almost symplectic structures, we can develop a direction with real phase space constructions when the complex unity i and respective complex terms are substituted in low energy limits by geometric N-adapted objects with almost complex structure and respective almost Kähler geometric models. For instance, such nonholonomic models were studied in [30] (for almost complex/ symplectic constructions both with symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics). A series of works [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 4] were devoted to classical commutative and noncommutative gravity and geometric flow theories with almost Kähler structure and their deformation and A-brane quantization. Such approaches can be generalized self-consistently for R-flux star deformations as we prove in other partner works. For certain classes of models, [01] and [10] contributions can be considered as real but almost complex ones (mimicking complex structures) or with complex imaginary terms.
We can transform the coordinate formulas (5.78) - (5.79) from [13], for the LC-connection, into respective formulas (125) and (126) for the canonical d-connection following such rules (for our conventions on indices and N-adapted values on nonholonomic phase spaces stated by Convention 2): 1) we change   e and 2) [ , ]  [ e, e]+w e ; 3) µ  µ , i.e.   D; 4) g  g = [ gij, gab] etc. Such transforms can be performed for a a nonholonomic frame structure (12) which allows us to N-elongate partial derivative operators and differentials and N-adapt formulas. Applying such rules, we can nonholonomically deform the formula (5.80) in [13] and compute the  = 3s/6 contribution to the nonassociative canonical

52

Ricci d-tensor (122),

[11]Ric = e [11] - e [11] + [11]µ µ + [10]µ [01]µ + [01]µ [10]µ

+ µ [11]µ - [11]µ µ - [10]µ [01]µ - [01]µ [10]µ

- µ [11]µ + wµ [11]µ

(127)

+

i 2

[(

el [10]µ)(

n+l

µ ) + (

el

µ)(

n+l [10]µ )

-( n+l [10]µ)( el µ ) - ( n+l µ)( el [10]µ )]

-

i 2

[(

el [10]µ )(

n+l

µ) +

el

µ )( n+l [10]µ)

-( n+l [10]µ )( el µ) - ( n+l µ )( el [10]µ)]

+iRn+i b n+k pb[( ek [01]µ)( ei µ ) + ( ek µ)( ei [01]µ ) -( ek [01]µ )( ei µ) - ( ek µ )( ei [01]µ)]

-

 2

Rn+i

b

n+k

pb[( el

-( el ek µ )( n+l

ek µ)( n+l ei µ) - ( n+l ek µ)( el ei µ) + ( n+l ek µ )( el ei µ)]

ei µ )

-iRn+i n+j n+k[k ( ej µi) [01]µ + ( ej [01]µi) µ +k µi( ej [01]µ) + [01]µi( ej µ) ]

+

 2

Rn+i

n+j

n+k [k

( el

ej

µi)(

n+l

µ) - ( n+l

ej

µi)( el

µ )

+k ( el µi)( n+l ej µ) - ( n+l µi)( el ej µ) ]

+iRn+i n+j n+kk[ ( ej e [01]µi) + ( ej + µ ( ej [01]µi) + [01]µ ( ej µi)]

µ ) [01]µi + (

ej [01]µ )

µi

-

 2

Rn+i

n+j

n+k k [(

el

ej

µ )(

n+l

µi) - (

n+l

ej

µ )(

el

µi)

+( el µ )( n+l ej µi) - ( n+l µ )( el ej µi)].

In an equivalent form, these formulas can be proven by performing a  decomposition with respective contractions of the first and forth indices in (123). To complete the computation of such real nonassociative and noncommutative contributions we have to insert formulas for coefficients of type [01], [10] and
[11], see (120). We omit such cumbersome formulas because they will be not used in this and partner works. For additional nonholonomic constraints resulting in zero distortion d-tensors and nonassociative LCconnections, when D = , see (112), in coordinate bases, we obtain the same (5.80) from [13]. It is
| T=0

53

important to have a prescription with rules 1)-4) in order to move geometric d-objects from local coordinate to N-adapted bases (and inversely), and to star deform them nonholonomicaly into configurations determined by canonical data ( e, g, µ). In such N-adapted variables, we can apply the AFCDM and prove certain general decoupling and integrability properties of nonassociative modified Einstein and Ricci flow equations. Such constructions are not possible if we work only with (non) associative/ commutative LC-data.
For h- and c-splitting, we have

Ric = { R hj =

i hj i ,

Pja = -

i

a ji

,

Pb k =

bc

c k

,

Sbc

= baca },

where each component splits also in respective [00], [01], [10] and [11] terms, for instance,

(128)

[00]Ric = { [00]R hj =

[00]ihji, [00]Pja = -

[00]i

a ji

,

[00]Pb k =

[00]bc

c k

,

[00]Sbc = [00]baca },

[01]Ric = {

[01]R hj =

[01] i hj i ,

[01]Pja = -

[01]i

a ji

,

[01]Pb k =

[01]bc

c k

,

[01]Sbc

= [01]baca },

and similarly for [1, 0] and [1, 1].

(129)

We can arrange the nonholonomic distributions on phase space that [00]Ric = R with commutative h- and c- coefficients (97) but other components contains nonassociative and noncommutative contributions from star product deformations.
Introducing star distortions of the canonical d-connection , D =  + Z (111) into formulas for ic (122), we can compute the distortions of the nonassocitative canonical Ricci scalar and Ricci d-tensors from corresponding values determined by the LC-connection,

Rsc = Rsc + Zsc and ic = ic + Zic,

(130)

with corresponding distortion tensors Z and Zic. Similar values for commutative configuration are determined by formulas (98). Here, we use the nonsymmetric inverse d-metric g (116) and the nonsymmetric canonical Ricci d-tensor Ric (122) for definition of the nonassociative canonical Ricci d-scalar, Rsc := g N Ric. In section 5.6 of [13], there are provided the coordinate formulas for the nonsymmetric Ricci tensor of a star deformed LC-connection, i.e. for ic and respective decompositions on parameters and . In principle, those formulas can be used for formulating nonassociative generalizations of vacuum Einstein equations, for instance, in the form ic = 0, see also formulas (5.66), (5.75) and (5.90) in that work. Unfortunately, it is not possible to prove a general decoupling property of such systems of nonlinear PDEs involving the (non) associative LC-connection ( )  because the zero-torsion conditions contract the indices in certain forms which do not allow decoupling. In another turn, the nonassociative gravitational field equations with ic can be decoupled and solved similarly to the commutative versions, in both case using the AFCDM. Such geometric constructions are with N-connection splitting and requests certain additional diadic decompositions both in h- and c-subspaces and can be elaborated both in nonassociative / noncommutative / commutative generalizations of the Einstein gravity.
Let us consider some important properties of on and  decompositions of nonassociative star d-metrics and canonical d-connections presented above:

1. We can consider nonholonomic distributions on a phase space M = TV with N-adapted quasi-Hopf structure that both the nonassociative LC-connection and respective distortion to the canonical dconnection are characterized by real terms with labels [00], with components as in the commutative cotangent Lorentz bundle; with imaginary (complex) terms determined with labels [01], which are proportional to , and with labels [10] being proportional to ; and with real terms [11] proportional to  = 3s/6 representing nontrivial contributions from nonassocitative geometry.

54

2. Here we note that nontrivial nonassociative contributions (both in real and imaginary forms) can be also encoded in the nontrivial N-connection coefficients Nje(xi, pa) in (10) and related off-diagonal components of the metric (94) being considered star deformations and quasi-Hopf algebra valued coefficients.
A number of imaginary or real terms in d-metric and linear connection structures vanish if we prescribe
some subclasses of (non) symmetric metrics with coefficients defined in such frames of reference/ coordi-
nates which do not depend, or instance, on momentum like variables, and/or are described by diagonal matrices etc. Nevertheless, even in such cases there are certain terms proportional to 3sRµ  and linear on momenta pa reflecting a nontrivial R-flux dependence due to nonassociativity (in the simplest case, due to the associator acting on some coefficients of metric and a linear connection). But a general covariant and self-consistent geometric treatment of geometric and physical theories M = TV request
nonassociative formalism with d-objects and respective coefficients depending on all phase space coordinates (xi, pa) even for certain models we consider projections, lifts, and pull-backs on a base spacetime V with local coordinates (xi). All additional algebraic commutative / noncommutative / nonassociative
and nonholonomic structures with star deformation contribute on V even the dependence on pa is not considered.

3. Keeping arbitrary the dependence on momentum like variables allows us not only to formulate a rigor-

ous geometrization of nonassociative physical models with nontrivial contributions to the Ricci d-tensor

ic (89) and related modified Einstein equations (to be derived in next section using ic con-

structed for D (105)). This give us the possibility to apply also the AFCDM for constructing exact

and parametric solutions with general off-diagonal dependence on all phase space coordinates (xi, pa). Further nonholonomic constraints, or certain smooth limits, to nonassociative / noncommutative / com-

mutative configurations depending only on (xi), in diagonal or not diagonal forms of (non) symmetric

metrics, can be considered. This way we can study, for instance, nonassociative off-diagonal star defor-

mations of the black hole metrics and possible implications in modern cosmology. A general decoupling

and integration property of nonassociative versions of gravitational and matter field equations is pos-

sible, for instance, for so-called diadic decompositions for the canonical d-connection D. Imposing

additional constraints (112) for D

= , we can extract zero-torsion LC-configurations with

| T=0

contributions from nonassociative geometry.

4 Nonassociative nonholonomic vacuum Einstein equations
In this section, we address the point how to formulate star nonholonomic deformations of vacuum Einstein equations with nontrivial cosmological constant and effective sources determined by real R-flux contributions on phase space and spacetime projections. For nonholonomic configurations, there are involved both types of symmetric and nonsymmetric components of a d-metric structure which can be connected respectively with the symmetric and nonsymmetric components of corresponding Ricci d-tensor. This allows us to perform such geometric constructions on total nonassociative phase spaces and do consider decompositions into h- and c(v)-components. We can project all geometric and physical objects, and respective fundamental equations, on commutative nonholonomic spacetimes which may contain nontrivial nonassociative term contributions. In result, we obtain a geometric proof of vacuum nonholonomic Einstein equations generalizing to nonassociative and nonholonomic configurations the ideas from [64, 8, 9]: Physically important systems of nonlinear PDEs (for dynamical interactions and flow evolution gravitational and matter fields in various types models and theories) can be defined following "pure" geometric principles considering metrics, covariant derivative operators, and respective Ricci tensors and curvature scalars. More advanced topics with generalized nonassociative variational calculus star nonholonomic deformations of Einstein equations (in string gravity with R-fluxes and/or for other type modifications) with nontrivial effective and matter field sources are considered

55

in our partner works.16

4.1 Nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations with nonsymmetric metrics
To derive geometrically such equations we consider star nonholonomic deformations of geometric data,

(

,

g ,

, Rµ )

commutative phase canonical nonholonomic

= deforms

(

e,

g ,

D ,

Rµ ) =

=

nonassociative = N-adapted star deforms

( e, g ,

D =

 + Z,

Ricµ ).

(131)

Any nonsymmetric d-metric g = g[0] + g[1] () (116) can be decomposed into the symmetric part,

g

=

1 2

(

g

+

g) =

g

-

i 2

R   e g  + R   e g

= g[0] + g[1] (), (132)

for

g[0] =

g and

g[1]

()

=

-

i 2

R  

e g  + R   e g

,

and the anti-symmetric part,

a

:=

1 2

(

g

-

g) =

i 2

R  

e g  - R   e g

=

a[1] () =

1 2

(

g[1] ()

-

g[1] ()),

(133)

where a[0] = 0 for nonassociative star deformations of commutative theories with symmetric metrics,

g = g + a .

(134)

In a similar form, we can decompose into symmetric and nonsymmetric parts the inverse d-metric (118),

g = g + a ,

where

g

=

1 2

(

g

+

g)

=

1 2

(

g

+

g)

-

i 2

(

g Rµ  (

eµ

g)

g + g Rµ  (

eµ

g)

g) + O(2)

=

1 2

(

g[0]

+

g[1] () +

g[0] +

g[1] ()) + O(2)

(135)

=

g[0]

+

1 2

(

g[1] ()

+

g[1] ()) + O(2),

= g[0] + g[1] () + O(2) = g[00] + g[01]( ) + g[10]() + g[11]( ) + O( 2, 2),

for g[0] = g[0] , g[1] () = g[1] (), g[0] = g[0] , see (118),

16We shall study also models with nonassociative (effective) energy-momentum sources and/or in the context of nonholonomic variants of Einstein-Eisenhart-Moffat [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 51, 49, 50, 21], see nonholonomic generalizations in [22, 23, 24], and related Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton theories [61, 8, 9], which are elaborated for star deformations and nontrivial R-flux contributions in our partner works.

56

and

a

=

1 2

(

g

-

g)

=

1 2

(

g

-

g)

-

i 2

(

g Rµ

(

eµ

g)

g - g Rµ  (

eµ

g)

g) + O(2)

=

1 2

(

g[0]

+

g[1] () -

g[0] -

g[1] ()) + O(2)

=

1 2

(

g[1] ()

-

g[1] ()) + O(2) =

a[1] () + O(2) =

a[10]() +

 a[11] (

) + O(

2, 2),

for

g[0] =

g[0] ,

a[1] () =

1 2

(

g[1] () -

g[1] ()),

a[00] = 0,

a[01]( ) = 0, see (118),

where the commutative and noncommutative d-metric and their inverses are considered to be symmetric but with nontrivial antisymmetric contributions from R-fluxes. The decompositions of the inverse nonsymmetric d-metric allows us to define and compute the nonassociative nonholonomic canonical Ricci scalar curvature

Rsc :=

gµ Ricµ = gµ + aµ

Ric(µ) + Ric[µ] = Rss + Rsa,

where Rss =: gµ Ric(µ) and Rsa := aµ Ric[µ].

(136)

In these formulas, it is considered a respective symmetric (...) and anti-symmetric [...] decomposition of the canonical Ricci d-tensor,
Ricµ = Ric(µ) + Ric[µ],
where symmetrization and anti-symmetrization are performed using the multiple 1/2. The commutative vacuum Einstein equations on phase space with cosmological constant  can be postu-
lated in such equivalent 8-d forms,

Eµ := Eµ :=

Ricµ

-

1 2

gµ

Rscµ =

 gµ , or

Ricµ

-

1 2

gµ

Rsc =

 gµ ,

(137)

see formulas (97) and (98), where Eµ and Eµ are the respective Einstein tensor and d-tensor. We note that using the Bianchi identities for the LC-connection we obtain

µ Eµ = 0, but Dµ( Eµ ) = S [ Z] = 0,

where S is computed using the canonical distortion relations (96). For nonholonomic structures in commutative classical geometrical mechanics and modified gravity theories, in general, S = 0 which is a consequence of non-integrability conditions.
Applying star nonholonomic deformations (131) to (137), we can define and compute N-adapted compo-
nents of nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations,

Ric

-

1 2

g

Rsc =

 g.

(138)

We can write these equations emphasizing explicitly the symmetric and nonsymmetric components of d-metric (134),

gµ (



+

1 2

Rsc)

=

aµ (



+

1 2

Rsc)

=

Ric(µ) and Ric[µ].

(139) (140)

57

From solutions of such systems of nonlinear PDEs, we can extract LC-configurations imposing at the end

the conditions (112) for D

= . The equations (139) and/or (140) can be re-written equivalently

| T=0

for  (when the Ricci d-tensor is symmetric) using canonical star distortions (111) which transforms such

equations in a more coupled nonholonomic and nonlinear system.

The systems of nonlinear PDEs (138) and, respectively, (139) and (140) are self-consistent because we can

always start with a solution of commutative vacuum Einstein equations (in general, such a solution is generic

off-diagonal) and compute any term for nonassociative models of gravity as N-adapted star deformations for

a symmetric g and respective N-adapted configurations. In a more general approach, we can prescribe an ansatz for g and search for a nonsymmetric star deformation aµ for an N-adapted eµ which is subjected to the condition to determine a solution of vacuum nonassociative gravitational field equations with

geometric objects and nontrivial sources induced by a R-flux.

If  = 0, we get systems of nonlinear PDEs of type

Ricµ = Ric(µ) + Ric[µ] = 0

(141)

which for LC-configurations and ansatz of metrics depending only on spacetime coordinates transform into nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations considered in [13]. In our partner works (see, for instance, [57]), we prove that the equations (141) (and above nonassociative gravitational equations with cosmological constant) can be decoupled and integrated in very general forms with generic off-diagonal symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics and generalized connections, in particular, for LC-configurations.
In a similar form, we can provide geometric proofs for canonical d-connections D =  + Z and corresponding distortions of type (70), for nonassociative models not considering quasi-Hopf structures, which for LC-configurations and respective ansatz of phase space metrics result in nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations considered in [12]. We omit such constructions in this work.

4.2 Nonassociative vacuum gravitational equations in hc-variables
The N-connection splitting defines a h- and c-decomposition of (138); (139) and (140); and (141) using formulas for the nonassociative canonical Ricci d-tensor (128). We have

Ric(µ)

=

{

1 2

(

R hj +

R

jh),

1 2

(

Pj a +

Pa j

),

1 2

(

Pk b +

Pb k

),

1 2

(

Sbc

+ Scb)} and

Ric[µ]

=

{

1 2

(

R hj -

R

jh),

1 2

(

Pj a -

Pa j

),

1 2

(

Pk b -

Pb k

),

1 2

(

Sbc -

Scb)},

where explicit computation of N-adapted coefficients involved contacting of indices in (121). All such values are computed for the nonassociative canonical d-connection with µ determined by the star d-metric g = ( gjr, gab) (91) via formulas (107), (108) and (109).
Following formulas (132), with g = g[0] + g[1] (), and (133), we find

a :=

0, 0, 0,

aab =

i 2

(Rcn+ka

ek gcb - Rcn+kb

ek gca) =

aa[1b]()

=

1 2

(

ga[1b]

-

gb[1a])()

.

The canonical Ricci scalar is computed using block (4 × 4) + (4 × 4) parametrization of respective matrices, gµ = ( gij, 0, 0, gab) and aµ = (0, 0, 0, acb),

Rss =:

gµ Ric(µ) = Rsh + Rsc and Rsa := acb Ric[cb], for Rsh = gij Ricij , Rsc = gab Ricab.

58

For such N-adapted nonassociative vacuum configurations, the system of nonlinear PDEs (139) and (140) splits into such h- and c-components
gij ( 2  + Rsh + Rsc + Rsa) = 2 R ij = 2 R ji, gbc( 2  + Rsh + Rsc + Rsa) = Sbc + Scb , Pj a = Pa j = 0, abc( 2  + Rsh + Rsc + Rsa) = Sbc - Scb .
Such a decoupling property is very important for extending the AFCDM and constructing exact and parametric solutions in nonassociative and (non) commutative gravity.

4.3 Parametric decomposition of nonassociative vacuum gravitational equations

Using decompositions (129), we can decompose above formulas on small parameters and ,

Ric(µ) = Ric[µ] =

[00]Ric(µ) + [01]Ric(µ)( ) + [10]Ric(µ)() + [11]Ric(µ)( ) + O( 2, 2, ...); and [00]Ric[µ] + [01]Ric[µ]( ) + [10]Ric[µ]() + [11]Ric[µ]( ) + O( 2, 2, ...),

where, for [00]R hj = [00]R jh and [00]Sbc = [00]Scb ,

[00]Ric(µ)

=

{

[00]R

hj ,

1 2

(

[00]Pj

a+

[00]Pa j

),

1 2

(

[00]Pk

b

+

[00]Pb k ),

[00]Sbc

},

[01]Ric(µ)

=

{

1 2

(

[01]R hj +

[01]R

jh),

1 2

(

[01]Pj

a+

[01]Pa j

),

1 2

(

[01]Pk

b

+

[01]Pb

k

),

1 2

(

[01]Sbc

+ [01]Scb )},

and similarly for [1, 0] and [1, 1];

and

[00]Ric[µ]

=

{

0,

1 2

(

[00]Pj

a

-

[00]Pa j

),

-

1 2

(

[00]Pj

a

-

[00]Pa j

), 0},

[01]Ric[µ]

=

{

1 2

(

[01]R hj -

[01]R

jh),

1 2

(

[01]Pj

a-

[01]Pa j

),

-

1 2

(

[01]Pj

a-

[01]Pa j

),

1 2

(

[01]Sbc

- [01]Scb )},

and similarly for [1, 0] and [1, 1].

Further computations are possible for parametric decomposition of the nonassociative canonical Ricci d-tensor following formulas (124)-(127).
Considering such formulas and (135), we compute the parametric decomposition on and  of the nonassociative Ricci scalar (136),

where

Rsc := [00]Rsc + [01]Rsc( ) + [10]Rsc() + [11]Rsc( ) + O( 2, 2, ...),
[00]Rsc = gµ[00] [00]Ric(µ), [01]Rsc = gµ[00] [01]Ric(µ) + gµ[01] [00]Ric(µ), [10]Rsc = gµ[00] [10]Ric(µ) + gµ[10] [00]Ric(µ) + a[10] [00]Ric[µ], [11]Rsc = gµ[00] [11]Ric(µ) + gµ[01] [10]Ric(µ) + gµ[10] [01]Ric(µ) + gµ[11] [00]Ric(µ)
+ a[10] [01]Ric[µ] + a[11] [00]Ric[µ],

59

where a complete parametric decomposition is possible if we apply (124)-(127). The parametric decomposition of the nonassociative system (139) and (140) for g = g[0] + g[1] ()
(116) and a = a[1] () is defined by such recurrent formulas

g[µ0] ( 2  + [00]Rsc) = 2 [00]Ric(µ), g[µ0] [01]Rsc = 2 [01]Ric(µ),
g[µ0] [10]Rsc + g[µ1] ( 2  + [00]Rsc) = 2 [10]Ric(µ), g[µ0] [11]Rsc + g[µ1] [01]Rsc = 2 [11]Ric(µ) and [00]Ric[µ] = 0, [01]Ric[µ] = 0, a[µ1] ( 2  + [00]Rsc) = 2 [10]Ric[µ], a[µ1] [01]Rsc = 2 [11]Ric[µ].

(142)

These formulas involve h- and c-decompositions for block parameterizations which can be written in explicit form using additionally formulas from previous subsection. In such a case, it is convenient to use block parameterizations of the symmetric and anti-symmetric d-metric components,

gµ = ( gij , 0, 0, gab), aµ = (0, 0, 0, acb) and gµ = ( gij, 0, 0, gab), aµ = (0, 0, 0, acb),
when the inverse matrices are computed not directly but using in N-adapted form respective formulas of type (104). We omit such formulas in this work but we prove a general decoupling property and provide examples of parametric solutions in our partner works.
The values g[µ0] in the first equation in (142) can be taken to determine a solution of vacuum Einstein equations (in general, with nontrivial cosmological constant) in a commutative gravity theory. Other terms are computed recurrently for respective parametric star deformations. The N-adapted structure should be chosen in such forms as the next step equations in that system of PDEs are self-consistent and define parametric solutions in respective noncommutative and nonassociative extensions. This should be checked always for explicit classes of solutions and their symmetries. We can not elaborate such geometric constructions of solutions if we work only with local coordinate frames and diagonal metric structures. Even we star with a commutative diagonal metric, further steps will result in certain generic off-diagonal symmetric and nonsymmetric contributions which involve also nonsymmetric Ricci d-tensor star deformations. In our partner work we show that such a nonsymmetric extension of the AFCDM can be applied in certain self-consistent forms resulting in explicit classes of exact/ parametric solutions.

4.4 Horizontal N-adapted projections and lifts of nonassociative Ricci d-tensors
In this work, our main goals is to prove that nonassociative gravity models determined by "non-geometric" R-fluxes in string theory [44, 12, 13] can be completely geometrized on nonholonomic phase spaces modeled as cotangent Lorentz bundles enabled with N-connection structure. In such an approach star nonholonomic deformations of commutative spacetime geometries result both in symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics which in the vacuum case can be related to respective symmetric and nonsymmetric components of some Ricci d-tensors. The constructions can be performed for certain canonical d-connections which allow a general decoupling and integration (for certain well-defined off-diagonal metric and distorted linear connection structures) of nonassociative nonholonomic Einstein equations and then re-definitions for LC-configurations.
For holonomic configurations, we start from tensors on a Lorentz manifold V, lift them on M = T V and/or M with complex momenta coordinates, and then construct new composite tensor using nonassociative star deformations of the geometry of M; the results can be reordered using the associator and projected back

60

to V. Functions and forms can be lifted from V to M as pullbacks of forms using the canonical projection  : T V  V. In the opposite direction, we can work with an embedding  : V  M, which is given by zero
section x  (x) = (x, 0), we pull back forms on M to forms on V. Lifts of vectors are obtained by considering
a foliation of M with constant momentum leaves (each such leaf is chosen to be diffeomorphic to V ). Using coordinated bases, such lifts of i on V a transformed into vector on M, when bi(x)i  (bi)(x, p)i, where (bi)(x, p)i = (bi)((x, p)) = bi(x). We can act also in opposite direction when vector fields on M are projected to vector fields on V via zero section of . In coordinate form, this is written in the form bi(x, p)i + ba(x, p)a  bi(x, 0)i.
In our approach, we work on nonholonomic manifolds and (co) tangent Lorentz bundles and perform the constructions in N-adapted form, when, for instance, bi(x, p) ei + ba(x, p) a  bi(x, 0) ei, see formulas (10). Any metric tensor gjk(x)dxj  dxk on V can be lifted into an off-diagonal metric and/or equivalent d­metric g (93) on TV. With respect to tensor product of N-adapted cobases e = (dxi, ea),
we can consider a matrix is parametrization for symmetric d-tensors,

gjk(x)   -

g(x, p) =

gij (x) + gab(x, p) Nia(x, p) Njb(x, p) gbe(x) Nie(x, p)

gae(x) Nje(x, p) gab(x))

gjk(x, p), gab(x, p)) = gµ (x, p) =

gjk(x, p) 0

0 gab(x, p)

gµ =

gjk(x, p) 0

0 gab(x, p)

,

where extensions to dependencies on all phase space coordinates (xi, pa) are defined by general frame and coordinate transforms on M. N-adapted star deformations g  g (102) are introduced as
g = g e N e  g = g N ( e N e),
when the linear R-flux corrections can be considered as off-diagonal/ block terms,

gjk(x, p)

0

0

gab(x, p)



gjk(x, p)

-

i 2

Rn+i

n+l n+j

eigkl

-

i 2

Rn+i

n+l n+k

eigjl

gab(x, p)

(143)



gj k (x)

-

i 2

Rn+i

n+l n+j

igkl

-

i 2

Rn+i

n+ln+k i gj l

gab(x, p)

, if gjk = gjk(x).

The h-projection of the Ricci d-tensor h Ric = { R hj}, see formulas (128) and (129), is a canonical d-connection analog of the nonassociative Ricci tensor for LC-connfiguration and projections on V. For zero

distortions,

Z = 0, i.

e.

D

=

| T=0

, see formulas (112) and (111), in a correspondingly defined local

basis, restricting the components of the Ricci tensors and d-tensors, Ric, to spacetime directions and setting

the momentum dependence to zero,

R hj(x, p)  ichj(x) = Richj (x) = ( ichj(x, p)) = Rhj(x, 0). In [13], the nonassociative vacuum solutions on phase space are postulated in the form

ic (x, p) = 0 with an assumption that every solution of such a system of nonlinear PDEs result in a solution of

(144)

Richj (x) = 0.

(145)

61

It was emphasized in that paper that not all solutions of (145) can be lifted to solutions of (144) on the phase space. Such a property was a consequence of the non-geometric R-flux contributions in string theory when it is not clear why the dynamics should be completely determined on phase spaces. In our approach, R-flux contributions can be geometrized in the framework of a nonassociative nonholonomic models with N-connections formulated on (co) tangent Lorentz bundles. We can nonholonomically deform any solution of (145) to solutions of (141) and inversely, we can consider respective nonholonomic constraints of type (112) and generate exact solutions for LC-configurations both in phase spaces and Lorentz manifold spacetimes. Such constructions involve, in general, generic off-diagonal components of symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics and even at the end, in some adapted frames/coordinates, the dependence on momentum like variables is not considered, the solution contain contributions from the nonholonomic dynamics on M = T V and/or M with respective and  terms. This conclusion is supported by various classes of exact and parametric solutions in nonassociative/ noncommutative / commutative gravity and geometric flow theory constructed by applying the AFCDM.

4.5 First order nonassociative nonholonomic corrections
Let us analyse some important physical properties of h-components of nonassociative and nonholonomic vacuum Einstein equations (141). Such formulas projected on a base spacetime V can be used for computing possible R-flux contributions. We consider a nontrivial dependence on momentum coordinates for the hcomponent of d-metric gjk(x, p) for an arbitrary value of a c-component gab(x, p) in (143). A nonholonomic frame structure (12) can be prescribed with "small" canonical distortions (111) when

[00]ijk = ijk = Lijk, [01]ijk = 0,

[10] i j k

=

-iRn+o a n+l pa

giq (

el

gqr )(

eo

Lrjk),

[10]ajk

=

-

i 2

Rn+i

a

n+q

glq

ei

Lqjk;

[10]ia k

=

i 2

Rn+o

a

n+l

gqi

eo(

gqr

Lrlk ),

[10]i

a k

=

i 2

Rn+o

a

n+l

giq eo( gqr Lrlk),

[11]ijk =

 2

Rn+o

n+q

n+l (

eo

gis)(

eq

gsr )(

el

Lrjk),

see respective formulas (99), (107) and (109) for the canonical d-connections, their star deformations and parametric decompositions. We note that for general nonholonomic distributions [01]ijk (120) and [01]Ric (125) being proportional to may be not zero even respective values for the LC-connection are zero in certain coordinate frames, see formulas (5.82)-(5.85) in [13].
R-fluxes define a nontrivial imaginary [10] h-term of the canonical Ricci d-tensor (126) which for a corresponding N-adapting with "small" canonical distortions,

[10]Ricjk = iRn+o a n+l pa{- ei[ giq( el gqr)( eo Lrjk)] + ek[ giq( el gqr)( eo Lrji)] - Lmjk giq( el gqr)( eo Lrmi) - Liim gmq( el gqr)( eo Lrjk) + Lmji giq( el gqr)( eo Lrmk) + Limk gmq( el gqr)( eo Lrji) +( el Liqi)( gqr Lrlk) - ( el Liqk)( gqr Lrli)}.

62

This term is imaginary but there is a real nontrivial contribution via

[11]Ricjk =

 2

Rn+o

n+q

n+l{

ei[(

eo

gim)(

eq

gmr )(

el

Lrjk)]

- ek[( eo gim)( eq gmr)( el Lrji)]

+( el gqr)[ eo( giq Lmik)( eq Lrjm) - eo( giq Lmim)( eq Lrjk)

+ Lmji eo( gir) - eo( Lmji) gir ( eq Lrmk)

- Lmjk eo( gir) - eo( Lmjk) gir ( eq Lrmi)]}.

In result, the horizontal N­adapted components of nonassociative vacuum Einstein equations (141) can be written in a form containing real contributions from string gravity with R-fluxes,

R hj(x, p) = R hj(x, p) + [11]Ricjk(x, p) = 0.

(146)

Applying the AFCDM, we can decouple and integrate such equations in arbitrary form for various classes of

h-metric components gjk(x, p) of a d-metric (143).

For additional nonholonomic constraints D

=  (112), we extract from (146) horizontal LC-

| T=0

configurations of type (144),

ichj(x, p) =

R hj(x,

p) +

 [11]

Rjk

(x,

p) = 0.

Solutions of such systems can be extracted for zero canonical distortions. For holonomic structures and gjk(x, p) = gjk(x), we generate configurations of type (145),

Richj (x) = Richj(x) + [11]Rjk(x) = 0.

In coordinate frames, these equations are equivalent to (5.90) from [13], when R-flux corrections to Ricci tensors determined on spacetime by  are independent on . This property holds true for some special classes of metrics gjk(x). In general, nonassociative gravity theories formulated on phase spaces involve contributions from the total space dynamics and geometric evolution processes. Such systems are generic nonlinear and off-diagonal when imaginary parts determine also real terms for nontrivial gravitational and matter field interactions on modified Einstein spaces. We construct such exact and parametric solutions and study possible physical implications in our partner works.

5 Summary of results and conclusions
In this work we have elaborated a formalism which allows us to geometrize on star deformed nonholonomic cotangent Lorentz bundles (considered as phase spaces with possible complexified momentum like coordinates) the nonassociative gravity models determined by non-geometric R-flux backgrounds of string theory. There are three important motivations to work on such curved phase spaces both in general nonholonomic forms and with associated nonlinear connection, N-connection structure:
1. Nonassociative R-flux contributions and respective star deformations involve momentum like variables pa which in relativistic commutative limits are related to geometric objects on a dual 4-d Lorentz manifold (with cotangent Minkowski space), for instance, of signature (+++-). We work in explicit form with 4-d and (4+4)-d configurations following the assumption that in certain commutative limits our nonassociative gravity and geometric flow models transforms into respective Einstein gravity (or possible f (R), metric-affine and similar modifications). For more general constructions in string / M-theory and
63

supergravity, we can elaborate on 5-d and 6-d (super) manifolds and respective (5+5)-d and (6+6)-d (co) tangent (super) bundles. We omit such considerations in our series of works but emphasize that a rigorous geometric (frame and coordinate free) formalism with nonassociative and noncommutative star products can be developed only using certain classes of geometric objects on (co) tangent [and (co) vector, with possible, for instance, Lie algebroid (dual) structures, or other type fibered structures, in order to work with different spacetime and (co) fiber dimensions]. In self-consistent geometric form, such constructions are adapted to certain classes of nonholonomic distributions which for (co) tangent bundles encode respective horizontal and (co) vertical splitting determined by N-connections.
2. Former works on nonassociative geometry and gravity are based on coordinate base star deforming formalism adapted to certain commutative/ noncommutative / nonassociative structures like in [12, 13], see also references therein. This follows a principle of deforming certain commutative algebras into nonassociative/ noncommutative ones and then to elaborate on plethora of nonassocitative geometric models when the explicit constructions on the type of adapting to respective nonholonomic structure and conventions on multiple local and covariant derivatives, symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics etc. In our approach, the main assumption is to begin with commutative configurations (for well-defined geometric and physical models) with general frame, metric and (non) linear connection structures and then to elaborate on nonassociative and noncommutative star nonholonomic star deformations in certain N-adapted and prescribed algebraic structure forms.
3. Building over this, we can move to constructions for star nonholonomic deforming of commutative models of differential geometry and gravity (and other types of geometrized matter field interactions). Such star deformations are determined by R-flux contributions and may encode commutative effects of some (commutative / modified) Einstein like equations if the definition of star products involves not just partial derivatives but certain general nonholonomic and respectively N-elongated partial derivative. In nonholonomic form, we can consider 2 (or 3)+2+2+... diadic decompositions which allow to generate exact and parametric solutions of nonassociative geometric and physically important systems nonlinear partial derivative equations, PDEs, using respective commutative analogs and their solutions. Such a procedure can be performed self-consistently at least for nonassocitaive/ noncommutative corrections with terms proportional to parameters ,  and  terms. Decoupling and integration properties of such systems can be proven for certain canonical nonholonomic configurations [57] but not in the case of holonomic systems with partial derivatives and their duals.
Above stated geometric constructions have been performed on full phase spaces endowed with canonical nonholonomic (nonintegrable, equivalently, anholonomic) structures when physically important systems of nonlinear PDEs in nonassociative gravity and geometric flow theories can be decoupled and integrated in very general forms. Such models involve star deformations of generalized metrics and nonlinear and linear connections like in (complexified and/or almost complex) relativistic Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry [26, 27, 32, 8, 9] and extensions to Einstein-Eisenhart-Moffat theories [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24] with nonsymmetric metrics. For additional nonholonomic constraints and small parametric limits, we can extract Levi-Civita configurations and reproduce in coordinate bases the nonassociative geometric objects and vacuum gravitational equations from [12, 13]. It should be noted here that there are alternative models of nonassociative geometry, for instance, with octonionic structure, see [65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70] and references therein. It would be interesting to see how such theories can be formulated in general nonholonomic forms and to see if the anholonomic frame deformation method, AFCDM, works for such configurations.
Our two main principles which we follow in this and partner papers are that
· 1] a self-consistent geometric approach to nonassociative physical models requests general frame formulations for certain commutative relativistic well-defined theories which for nontrivial R-flux and other type string/ quantum are completely star deformed following Convention 2 and formulas (15); and
64

· 2] the nonassociative generalized gravitational and matter fields dynamics, and various models of geometric evolution with quantum and classical information encoding must be completely determined on star nonholonomic deformed phase space.
Such a program can be performed only for geometric constructions adapted in canonical forms to respective N-connection structures. The nonassociative nonholonomic vacuum gravitational equations can formulated on the total phase space, projected on horizontal and cofiber components, and computed analytically on all order corrections on R-flux and noncommutative parameters. Following additional geometric and/or nonassociative generalized variational principles such nonassociative modified Einstein equations can be generalized for nontrivial (effective) matter field sources when decoupling properties can be preserved (proofs are similar to those in [8, 9, 6, 7]).
We can pull back the vacuum and nonvacuum nonassociative nonholonomic Einstein equations from phase space to a commutative spacetime with R-flux real corrections, for instance, via the zero momentum section  : V  M as it is considered at the end of previous section and in [13]. The nonassociativity survives on the action of diffeormorphisms on commutative base spacetime but following our nonholonomic geometric approach we can compute additional generic off-diagonal and N-connections effects which is not possible if we work only in local coordinate (co) frames. Such geometric and analytic constructions and applications in modern astrophysics and cosmology were considered in noncommutative and commutative modified gravity and string theories [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11].
Finally,we emphasize that the main goal of this work was to provide a nonholonomic geometric background which will allow to develop our AFCDM and quantum deformation methods for nonassociative classical and quantum geometric gravitational and information theories.
Acknowledgments: This work develops for nonassociative geometry and gravity some research programs on geometry and physics, during 2006-2015, supported by a project IDEI­Romania and senior fellowships at the Perimeter Institute and Fields Institute (Ontario, Canada), CERN (Geneva, Switzerland) and Max Planck Institut für Physik / Werner Heisenberg Institut, München (Germany). SV is grateful to professors V. G. Kupriyanov, D. Lüst, N. Mavromatos, J. Moffat, D. Singleton, P. Stavrinos, and other host professors, for respective hosting of short/ long terms visits, seminars, and/or discussing important ideas and preliminary results.
References
[1] S. Vacaru, Gauge and Einstein gravity from non-Abelian gauge models on noncommutative spaces, Phys. Lett. B 498 (2001) 74-82; arXiv: hep-th/0009163
[2] S. Vacaru, Exact solutions with noncommutative symmetries in Einstein and gauge gravity, J. Math. Phys. 46 (2005) 042503; arXiv: gr-qc/0307103
[3] S. Vacaru, Finsler black holes induced by noncommutative anholonomic distributions in Einstein gravity, Class. Quant. Grav. 27 (2010) 105003 (19pp); arXiv: 0907.4278 [math-ph]
[4] S. Vacaru, Noncommutative Einstein, almost Kaehler ­ Finsler and Quantum Deformations. Chapter 24 in: "The Algebraic Way. Space, Time and Quantum Beyond Peaceful Coexistence", ed. Ignazio Licata (World Scientific, Singapore, 2016), pp. 661-695
[5] L. Bubuianu, K. Irwin and S. Vacaru, Heterotic supergravity with internal almost-Kaehler spaces; instantons for SO(32), or E8 x E8, gauge groups; and deformed black holes with soliton, quasiperiodic and/or pattern-forming structures, Class. Quant. Grav. 34 (2017) 075012; arXiv: 1611.00223
65

[6] L. Bubuianu and S. Vacaru, Deforming black hole and cosmological solutions by quasiperiodic and/or pattern forming structures in modified and Einstein gravity, Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) 393; arXiv: 1706.02584
[7] L. Bubuianu and S. Vacaru, Black holes with MDRs and Bekenstein-Hawking and Perelman entropies for Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton spaces, Annals of Physics, NY, 404 (2019) 10-38; arXiv: 1812.02590
[8] S. Vacaru, On axiomatic formulation of gravity and matter field theories with MDRs and FinslerLagrange-Hamilton geometry on (co) tangent Lorentz bundles, arXiv: 1801.06444
[9] L. Bubuianu and S. Vacaru, Axiomatic formulations of modified gravity theories with nonlinear dispersion relations and Finsler-Lagrange-Hamilton geometry, Eur. Phys. J. C 78 (2018) 969
[10] S. Vacaru and L. Bubuianu, Classical and quantum geometric information flows and entanglement of relativistic mechanical systems, Quantum Inf. Process, QINP 18 (2019) 376; arXiv: 1905.13015
[11] S. Vacaru, Geometric information flows and G. Perelman entropy for relativistic classical and quantum mechanical systems, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 639; arXiv: 1905.12399
[12] R. Blumenhagen and M. Fuchs, Towards a theory of nonassociative gravity, JHEP 1601 (2016) 039; arXiv: 1604.03253
[13] P. Aschieri, M. Dimitrijevi iri, R. J. Szabo, Nonassociative differential geometry and gravity with non-geometric fluxes, JHEP 02 (2018) 036; arXiv: 1710.11467
[14] A. Einstein, Einheitliche Fieldtheorie von Gravitation and Electrizidät, Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie Wissebsgaften, Mathematischn­Naturwissenschaftliche Klasse. (1925) 414-419; translated in English by A. Unzicker and T. Case, Unified Field Theory of Gravitation and Electricity, session report from July 25, 1925, pp. 214-419, arXiv: physics/0503046 and http://www.lrz-muenchen.de/ aunzicker/ae1930.html
[15] A. Einstein, A Generalization of the relativistic theory of gravitation, Ann. of Math. 46 (1945) 578-584
[16] L. P. Eisenhart, Generalized Riemann spaces, I. Proc. Nat. Acad. USA 37 (1951) 311-314
[17] L. P. Eisenhart, Generalized Riemann spaces, II. Proc. Nat. Acad. USA 38 (1952) 505-508
[18] J. W. Moffat, New theory of gravity, Phys. Rev. D 19 (1979) 3554-3558
[19] J. W. Moffat, Nonsymmetric gravitational theory, Phys. Lett. B 355 (1995) 447-452; arXiv: gr-qc/0411006
[20] J. W. Moffat, Nonsymmetric gravitational theory, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 3722-3232; Erratum, 36 (1995) 7128
[21] J. W. Moffat, Noncommutative quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 491 (2000) 345-352; arXiv: hep-th/0007181
[22] S. Vacaru, Einstein gravity in almost Kaehler variables and stability of gravity with nonholonomic distributions and nonsymmetric metrics, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 48 (2009) 1973-2000; arXiv: 0806.3808
[23] S. Vacaru, Einstein gravity, Lagrange-Finsler geometry, and nonsymmetric metrics, SIGMA, 4 (2008) 071, 29 pages; arXiv: 0806.3810
[24] S. Vacaru, Nonholonomic Ricci flows, exact solutions in gravity, and symmetric and nonsymmetric metrics, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 48 (2009) 579-606; arXiv: 0806.3812
66

[25] S. Vacaru, Spectral functionals, nonholonomic Dirac operators, and noncommutative Ricci flows, J. Math. Phys. 50 (2009) 073503; arXiv: 0806.3814
[26] S. Vacaru, Locally anisotropic gravity and strings, Ann. Phys. (NY), 256 (1997) 39-61; arXiv: gr-qc/9604013
[27] S. Vacaru, Superstrings in higher order extensions of Finsler superspaces, Nucl. Phys. B, 434 (1997) 590-656; arXiv: hep-th/9611034
[28] S. Vacaru, Deformation quantization of almost Kaehler models and Lagrange-Finsler spaces, J. Math. Phys. 48 (2007) 123509; arXiv: 0707.1519 [gr-qc]
[29] S. Vacaru, Deformation quantization of nonholonomic almost Kaehler models and Einstein gravity, Phys. Lett. A 372 (2008) 2949-2955; arXiv: 0707.1667 [gr-qc]
[30] S. Vacaru, Branes and quantization for an A-model complexification of Einstein gravity in almost Kaehler variables, Int. J. Geom. Meth. Mod. Phys. 6 (2009) 873-909; arXiv: 0810.4692
[31] M. Anastasiei and S. Vacaru, Fedosov quantization of Lagrange-Finsler and Hamilton-Cartan spaces and Einstein gravity lifts on (co) tangent bundles, J. Math. Phys. 50 (2009) 013510 (23 pages); arXiv: 0710.3079 [math-ph]
[32] S. Vacaru, Einstein gravity as a nonholonomic almost Kaehler geometry, Lagrange-Finsler variables, and deformation quantization, J. Geom. Phys. 60 (2010) 1289-1305; arXiv: 0709.3609 [math-ph]
[33] P. Bouwknegt, K. Hannabuss, and V. Mathai, Nonassociative tori and applications to T-duality, Commun. Math. Phys. 264 (2006) 41-69; arXiv: hep-th/o412092
[34] L. Alvarez-Gaume, F. Meyer, and M. A. Vazquez-Mozo, Comments on noncommutative gravity, Nucl. Phys. B753 (2006) 92-127; arXiv: hep-th/0605113
[35] D. Lüst, T-duality and closed string non-commutative (doubled) geometry, JHEP 12 (2010) 084; arXiv: 1010.1361
[36] R. Blumenhagen and E. Plauschinn, Nonassociative gravity in string theory? J. Phys. A44 (2011) 015401; arXiv: 1010.1263
[37] D. Mylonas, P. Schupp, and R. J. Szabo, Memberane sigma-models and qunatization of non-geometric flux backgrounds, JHEP 09 (2012); arXiv: 1207.0926
[38] C. Condeescu, I. Florakis, C. Kounnas, and D. Lüst, Gauged supergravities and non-geometric Q/R-fluxes from asymmetric orbifold CFT's, JHEP 10 (2012) 057; arXiv: 1307.0999
[39] R. Blumenhagen, M. Fuchs, F. Haßler, D. Lüst, and R. Sun, Non-associative deformations of geometry in duble field theory, JHEP 04 (2014) 141; arXiv: 1312.0719
[40] V. G. Kupriyanov, L-Bootstrap approach to non-commutative gauge theories, Fortsch. Phys. 67 (2019) 1910010; arXiv: 1903.02867
[41] V. G. Kupriyanov, Non-commutative deformations of Chern-Simons theory, Eur. Phys. J. C80 (2020) 42; arXiv: 1905.08753
[42] G. E. Barnes, A. Schenkel, and R. J. Szabo, Nonassociative geometry in quasi-Hopf representation catergories I: Bimodules and their internal homomorphisms, J. Geom. Phys. 89 (2015) 111-152; arXiv: 1409.6331
67

[43] G. E. Barnes, A. Schenkel, and R. J. Szabo, Nonassociative geometry in quasi-Hopf representation catergories II: Connectons and curvatures, J. Geom. Phys. 106 (2015) 234-255; arXiv: 1507.02792
[44] D. Mylonas, P. Schupp, and R. J. Szabo, Non-geometric fluxes, quasi-Hopf twist deformations and nonassociative quantum mechanics, J. Math. Phys. 55 (2014) 122301; arXiv: 1312.1621
[45] V. G. Kupriyanov and D. V. Vassilevich, Nonassociative Weyl star products, JHEP 1509 (2015) 102; arXiv: 1506.02329
[46] V. G. Kupriyanov, Weak associativity and deformation quantization, Nucl. Phys. B910 (2016) 240-258; arXiv: 1606.01409
[47] V. G. Kupriyanov, Non-associative star products and quantization of non-geometric backgrounds in string and M-theory, PoS CRFU2017 (2018) 200; arXiv: 1804.10161
[48] V. G. Kupriyanov, Recurrence relations for symplectic realizaton of (quasi)-Poisson structures, J. Phys. A52 (2019) 225204; arXiv: 1805.12040
[49] M. A. Clayton, Massive NGT and spherically symmetric systems, J. Math. Phys. 37 (1996) 395-420; arXiv: gr-qc/0505005
[50] M. A. Clayton, Linearisation instabilities of the massive nonsymmetric gravitational theory, Class. Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 2851-2864; arXiv: gr-qc/9603062
[51] J. W. Moffat, Dynamical constraints in the nonsymmetric gravitational theory, arXiv: gr-qc/9605016
[52] T. Janssen and T. Prokopec, Instabilities in the nonsymmetric theory of gravitation, Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006) 4967-4882; arXiv: gr-qc/0604004
[53] T. Prokopec and W. Valkenburg, The Cosmology of the Nonsymmetric Theory of Gravitation, Phys. Lett. B 636 (2006) 1-4; arXiv: astro-ph/0503289
[54] T. Janssen and T. Prokopec, Problems and hopes in nonsymmetric gravity, J. Phys. A 40 (2007) 70677074; arXiv: gr-qc/0611005
[55] T. Janssen and T. Prokopec, Vacuum properties of nonsymmetric gravity in de Sitter space, JCAP (2007) 0705:010; arXiv: 0705 (2007) 010
[56] T. Damour, S. Deser and J. G. McCarthy, Nonsymmetric gravity theories: Inconsistencies and a cure, Phys. Rev. D47 (1993) 1541-1556; arXiv: gr-qc/9207003
[57] E. V. Veliev, L. Bubuianu and S. I. Vacaru, Decoupling and integrability of nonassociative vacuum phase space gravitational equations with star and R-flux parametric deformations [in preparation]
[58] P. Aschieri and R. J. Szabo, Triproducts, nonassociative star products and geometry of R-fulx string compactifications, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 634 (2015) 012004; arXiv: 1504.03915
[59] P. Aschieri, M. Dimitrijevic, F. Meyer, and J. Wess, Noncommutative geometry and gravity, Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006) 1883-1912, arXiv: hep-th/0510059
[60] V. G. Drinfeld, Quasi-Hopf algebras, Alg. Anal. 1 N6 (1989) 114-148
[61] Clifford and Riemann- Finsler Structures in Geometric Mechanics and Gravity, Selected Works, by S. Vacaru, P. Stavrinos, E. Gaburov and D. Gonta. Differential Geometry - Dynamical Systems, Monograph 7 (Geometry Balkan Press, 2006); www.mathem.pub.ro/dgds/mono/va-t.pdf and arXiv: gr-qc/0508023 [Part III is devoted to noncommutative Finsler-Lagrange gravity, strings and Clifford-Finsler gravity]
68

[62] P. Aschieri and L. Castellani, Noncommutative gravity solutions, J. Geom. Phys. 60 (2010) 375-393; arXiv: 0906.2774
[63] R. Blumenhagen, M. Fuchs, F. Hassler, D. Lüst and R. Sun, Nonassociative deformations of geometry in double filed theory, JHEP 1404 (2014) 141; arXiv: 1312.0719
[64] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorn and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation (Freeman, 1973) [65] D. F. Kurdgelaidze, The foundation of nonassociative classical field theory, Acta Phys. Hung. 57 (1985)
79 [66] S, Okubo, Introduction to Octonion and other Non-associative Algebras in Physics (Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1995) [67] C. Castro Perelman, The Noncommutative and Nonassociative Geometry of Octonionic Spacetime, Mod-
ified Dispersion Relations and Grand Unification, J. Math. Phys, 48 (2007) 073517 [68] C. Castro Perelman, Octonionic Ternary Gauge Field Theories Revisited, IJGMMP, (2014) 1450013 [69] C. Castro Perelman, R x C x H x O-valued Gravity as a Grand Unified Field Theory, Adv. Appl. Clifford
Algebras 29 (2019) 22 [70] M. Günaydin, D. Lüst and E. Malek, Non-associativity in non-geometric stirng and M-theory background,
the albebra of octonions, and missing momentum models, JHEP 1611 (2016) 027, arXiv: 1607.06474
69

