DECOUPLING ENVIRONMENTAL MODES FROM TUNNELING ELECTRONS IN A PARTIALLY WET PHASE MOLECULAR MECHANICALLY CONTRALLABLE BREAK JUNCTION

arXiv:2106.01716v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 3 Jun 2021

C.J. Muller This research has, in its entirety, been privately conducted and funded by the author.

June 4, 2021

ABSTRACT

A quantum effect at ambient conditions is presented. A benzene dithiol (BDT) molecule or a tetra hydro furan (THF) molecule is used as a barrier molecule bridging the gold electrodes from a Mechanically Controllable Break junction. It has been known for a long time that the environment of a junction couples to the conduction. With a microscopic layer of fluid it is actually possible to influence this coupling. The electrode-molecule-electrode configuration is lined with a microscopic layer of THF fluid, also known as the "partially wet phase". This is effectively decoupling the electrode-molecule-electrode system from environmental modes outside of this system. The effects on coherence and quantum interference are exceptional.

1 Introduction

system by an amount of e2/2C. At low temperatures and

small applied voltages, conduction is suppressed because

More than 60 years ago von Hippel [1] laid out his vi- of the charging energy."

sion where he saw a world using the intrinsic properties of This phenomenon is now known as the Coulomb blockade

atoms and molecules:

of single-electron tunneling [4]. Although the physics of

"One could build materials from their atoms and molecules granular films and systems need to account for a distri-

for the purpose at hand ... . He can play chess with ele- bution in particle-size and thus capacitance, theoretical

mentary particles according to their prescribed rules until elements used in the early descriptions [3, 5, 6] are still

engineering solutions become apparent."

present in today's theory for more well defined systems for

example a single junction. It was a time where radio tubes were being replaced by

integrated circuits and transistors. In contrast to the logical A single small-capacitance junction, consisting of super-

and, already in those days, destined successful path of on- conducting material, was predicted to show a new type of

going miniaturization for IC's, von Hippel was advocating voltage oscillation in 1975 [7] transposing the current and

a bottom up approach which he called Molecular Engineer- voltage character as compared to the normal AC Joseph-

ing. With this view von Hippel laid the foundation for a son effect. This is reminiscent of Bloch electrons in a

field which we now call Molecular Electronics [2].

perfect crystal with lattice constant a, moving through

the energy band representation and being reflected by the

During that same time frame, although seemingly unrelated Brillouin zone at 2/a to the opposing Brillouin zone at

at the time, Gorter [3] established an important finding on -2/a, physically identical in nature. A conduction elec-

the resistivity-temperature curve of granular Sn particle tron under the influence of a constant electric field E, will

films:

start to oscillate in real space, as a result of interaction

"The granularity of the transported charge manifests itself in the conductance as a result of the Coulomb repulsion of individual electrons. The transfer by tunneling of one electron between two initially neutral regions, of mutual capacitance C, increases the electrostatic energy of the

with the periodic lattice potential with a Bloch frequency: fB = aeE/(2 ). In real life this effect is not observed in crystals, as the conduction electrons are scattered before they can complete the cycle in the Brillouin zone in k space.

Correspondence: PO Box 60, 6580 AB Malden, The Netherlands

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

In superconducting small-capacitance current biased junc- tion was decoupled from the leads by inclusion of large tions the elementary frequency equals fSC = I/(2e), with resistors, with values much larger than RQ = h/e2 in
a corresponding band-zone edge at Q = +e or -e in the the electrical leads at very close proximity, µm's, to the

energy band representation, Q being the charge on the ca- junction [17].

pacitor. The origin of these predicted voltage oscillations, is the continuous charging until the level reaches +e or -e after which a tunnel event occurs and the recharging starts again. At the tunnel event the system jumps from the band-zone edge to the opposing zone edge, both physically identical in nature, and the cycle starts again.

An alternative elegant way to decouple a small capacitance from the leads, is by implementing two high resistive tunnel junctions, with tunnel resistances RT RQ, on either side of a conductive island [18], very similar to Gorter's use of granular films where small Sn particles are connected via oxidized tunnel barriers. These structures are

The charging of the capacitor with a continuous charge Q, known as "dots". The low capacitance central island part

smaller than a 2e Couper pair charge is physically possi- of the dot is perfectly isolated from environmental modes

ble. A moving charge carrier can create some influence in the leads by the two high impedance tunnel junctions.

charge far smaller as compared to the unit charge of a The coupling or tunnel rates of these model systems to the

charge carrier on the small capacitor while moving to the leads can be tuned by the characteristic resistance of the

location where it will eventually tunnel, hence treating Q tunnel junctions. The capacitance can be low as it scales

as a classical variable.

with the size of the dot. The condition RT RQ for the

The interest in this system originates from the uncertainty relation between , the superconductor order parameter, and Q[, Q] = i2e. When  is well defined, the system is described by the AC Josephson effect, it implies that Q is undefined, which is equivalent to a large capacitance system. In the other extreme, for small capacitance systems, theoretically Q is well defined and  is undefined, leading

two tunnel junctions ensures that after tunneling to the dot, the electron is localized there. The dot system thus exhibits both the wave character, tunneling to and from the dot, as well as the particle character of an electron as there can only be an integer number of electrons on the dot. If RT becomes smaller than RQ the charge becomes delocalized along the system and charging effects will be suppressed.

to the small-capacitance effects as described above.

There are a number of dot regimes possible [19]. A metal-

In the mid 1980's several authors of the first hour [8­11] theoretically analyzed small-capacitance effects in both normal metal and superconducting metal junctions, they predicted that both the superconducting as well as the normal metal small capacitance junction would each have their own type of voltage oscillation. The normal metal type single electron tunneling (SET) oscillations will have a frequency fN = I/e, the tunnel event occurs at the zone edge +e/2 or -e/2 in the energy band representation. A

lic grain of µm size holds billions of electrons occupying
billions of states up to the Fermi energy. The coulomb
repulsion by putting 1 additional electron on this grain requires this electron to have an excess energy of e2/2C,
before being able to enter the grain. The Fermi wavelength
is of the order of the inter atomic distance, much smaller
as the particle size, ensuring the metal electron states are
as in bulk metal, finely dispersed with energy separations much smaller than the e2/2C value.

rigorous theoretical underpinning of these predicted ef- A different regime holds in a semiconductor dot also of µm

fects [12, 13] initiated a widespread experimental research, dimensions. The Fermi wavelength in semiconductors is

for extensive early reviews see [14, 15]. Defining a phase of the order of 100 nm. Now the charging energy as well

S(t) = (e/

)

t -

V

(t

)dt

being the integral over the

voltage across the junction, Schön [16] demonstrated the

as finite size effects in this dot interact with one-another. When the charging energy of these dots become compa-

commutation rule [S, Q] = ie for normal metal junc- rable to the energy level spacing it is predicted that the tions. It was well recognized that with a small-capacitance spin degeneracy is lifted and a regular renormalized level

junction we might have a system with the possibility to spacing is the resultant [20]. Because next to the charging

complete the full cycle through the energy band represen- effects the finite size effects of these types of dots start to

tation and arrive at a novel quantum effect.

become a crucial factor in the description these dots are

called quantum dots.

Experiments on small capacitance single junctions became

possible due to advanced e-beam lithography capabilities Where Gorter meets von Hippel we arrive at the ultimate

in the 80's. A capacitance of the order of 10-15 F leads quantum dot. One molecule attached via two tunnel junc-

to a charging energy of 1 K, a temperature well acces- tions to the leads. Note that this dot diameter is smaller by

sible by cryogenic techniques. Results showed that the more than a factor of 1000, as compared to the quantum

direct electrical environment of the junction played a cru- dot regime detailed above. HOMO and LUMO orbitals

cial role in the occurrence of a Coulomb blockade gap in are interacting with the charging energy and are expected

the current-voltage (IV)-curve. Parasitic capacitance of to play a role in the conduction. Free molecules have a

the electrical leads connecting to the junction is in the pF discrete set of electronic levels, typical level spacing is in

range, much larger than the junction capacitance, leading the eV range. Molecules exhibit vibrational and rotational

to a high capacitance-value as seen by the junction and degrees of freedom, where the typical vibrational energies

thus easily destroying any EC = e2/2C charging-energy effects. This was prompting experiments where the junc-

are in the 0.1 eV range and the rotational energies are in the meV range. One of the early and most spectacular

2

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

successes of quantum theory is the answers it provided to bending beam. A glass liquid cell is mounted surrounding
questions related to molecular structure and spectra. Now the junction area using a liquid rubber. Fig. 1 shows the
we are faced with questions related to a single connected bending beam assembly. Two types of cells have been molecule. Will such a system still be described by an used. One with a 4.5 mm inner diameter (4in.5), which electrostatic capacitance? As the molecule only measures releases the solution upon pivoting of the setup to the cell
a few Å it is not safe to assume the screening length in opening, where the solution can be absorbed. The other the molecule to be smaller as compared to the size of the cell inner diameter measures 2 mm (2in). This cell needs molecule. It cannot be assumed to be an electrostatic ca- to be drained with a paper tip due to the capillary forces pacitance. For simplicity, this system is treated as if it can holding the fluid in the cell upon tilting.
be described by a single electrostatic capacitance value.

In all of the above described systems, the environment of the junction has played an important role ever since the first experiments on small capacitance junctions. It is important to define the quantum mechanical environment [21­23]. Next to the system defining modes, determined for example by junction capacitance, inductance, resistance, the tunneling electron can couple to other modes. These modes can couple to the junction via the leads (lead environmental modes) or via the vacuum (vacuum environmental modes). The vacuum environmental modes reflect the coupling between tunneling electrons and modes in the medium enclosing the electrode-molecule-electrode configuration. These modes are present in every enclosing medium, even in vacuum, hence "vacuum environmental modes" even though the enclosing medium may technically not be a vacuum.

In reality the different types of modes are hard to distin-

guish, a certain environment encompasses a coupling of

various modes and mode types [21­23]. Quantum dots

with RT RQ are well decoupled from lead environmental modes. The decoupling from vacuum environmental

modes is however from an experimental point of view

difficult to influence. It is important to realize that a tunnel-

ing electron can couple to vacuum environmental modes

and loss or gain energy to or from these modes. With in-

creasing frequency, the coupling to vacuum environmental

modes becomes easier as high frequency processes experi- Fig. 1: Bending beam assemblies with mounted cells, the

ence very low impedance in vacuum, as the impedance of beam measures 1 × 5 × 24 mm. Photo a and c show the

vacuum equals 377  only, far less than RQ.

2in cell with a typical length of 26 mm . The inside of the

A study of partially wet phase molecular junctions is pre- cell shows the junction in the center, the liquid rubber is

sented, where a molecule is bridging the gap between two electrodes of a MCB junction. In the ideal situation, the

applied from the outside ensuring a tight and flexible seal. Photo b shows the 4in.5 cell with a typical length of 22 mm.

system defining modes are the only relevant modes for tun- Copper leads complete the connections.

neling electrons to couple to. Ideally all lead environmental

modes and vacuum environmental modes are decoupled from the electrode-molecule-electrode system. Below it will be shown that nature provides for such a system.
2 Experimental Setup and Way of Work

In the measurements no dependency could be detected on

the temper of the gold filament. Some dependency was

detected 4in.5. For

related to the completeness

inner diameter of the cell, 2in or the temper of the gold and the inner

cell diameter are listed for reported data of every bending

beam assembly.

Experiments are executed at ambient conditions. The clas- The experimental setup makes use of a pivoting MCB sical notched filament MCB junction [24] has been used. A setup, enabling the partially wet phase [25], as detailed in phosphor bronze bending beam is laminated with a 200 µm ref [26]. In this setup the MCB bending beam assembly thick insulating Kapton layer, glued with Stycast epoxy to can be pivoted to a desired angle, to either submerge the the bending beam. Filament material is either made up of junction in fluid, or to drain the junction area from fluid 99.99 % hard temper Au (AuH) or 99.99 % soft temper Au while the adjusted junction remains intact during pivot(AuS) glued with Stycast epoxy to the Kapton insulated ing. For bending beam assemblies using the 4in.5 cell, the

3

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

pivoting was used to drain the cell, after draining the cell
was placed in vertical position again. For bending beam assemblies using the 2in cell the setup was maintained in a fixed vertical cell position.

motor is immediately switched off. Based on the spindle velocity as well as the bending beam assembly attenuation factor it is estimated that the electrode separation at this stage is in the order of nanometers.

The IV curves are recorded with a HP4155 Semiconductor · In this situation the junction is completely immersed in

Parameter Analyzer. The junctions are voltage biased, one fluid and thus in the completely wet phase. Approxi-

side of the junction is kept at zero the other side was volt- mately 2-5 minutes settling time is provided for wetting

age scanned, while measuring the current. The HP4155 the newly formed electrodes and for molecules to adhere,

exhibits 4 independent signal monitoring units (SMU's) prior to draining.

of which 2 are required for a measurement. The repro- · The bending beam assembly is drained, either by piv-

ducibility of the obtained results has been validated on 2 independent sets of SMU's. The HP4155/measurement

oting the setup (4in.5 cell) or by a paper tip (2in cell). Draining is performed in such a way that it takes about

setup attached to the MCB setup has been regularly tested half an hour to get to the completely dry phase.

with a 50 M resistor connected at the device location. · Directly after draining the setup is pivoted back to the

Double shielded cables are used to connect to the device; original position in case the 4in.5 cell has been used; IV the last few centimeters to the junction are unshielded. No measurements can be recorded while the junction area

additional filtering is used. The piezo HV supply, for fine slowly dries. Alternatively a current measurement can

tuning of the MCB junction, is not used for the reported be taken (for example at -5 V) every few minutes where

experiments. IV traces (single direction, indicated by small full IV measurements are only started once the partially

arrows) consist of 1000 data points, recorded in 45 sec- wet phase has been reached.

onds. The time between consecutive data points remains 45 ms where partial traces are shown. The scans which are recorded faster are indicated. On some occasions two consecutive scans with opposing scan direction are shown, in these cases also each scan consists of 1000 data points and there is no delay at the point of scan reversal.

· Once the setup is in the original position, it is not to be touched any more. The drying process progresses the junction through the following phases:
­ The completely wet phase, once broken and still immersed in fluid and also just after draining

In the 90`s Tour was pioneering the synthesis of di-thiolate molecules [27] which exhibit 2 opposing thiol anchor groups, enabling the initial MCB BDT experiments at Yale [28]. In the below experiments commercially available BDT molecules (99+ % pure) are dissolved in 99.85+

­ The partially wet phase, where a layer thickness of only 1 or a few THF molecules will line the electrodemolecule-electrode system.
­ The completely dry phase, defined as completely dry from THF.

% anhydrous (< 50 ppm H2O) tetrahydrofuran stabilized · After reaching the completely dry phase the MCB junc-

with 200-250 ppm butylated hydroxyl-toluene.

tion has to be discarded of and needs to be replaced with

Two different types of experiments have been performed. a new (unbroken filament) bending beam assembly.

In one type a BDT THF solution is used with a concentration of approximately 1 mM, where the intent is to cre-

The majority of the experiments are performed in the partially wet phase, limiting measurement time to a few min-

ate a THF partially wet phase electrode-BDT molecule- utes only before entering the completely dry phase. During

electrode structure. The other experiment type made use of this time the IV traces still change as a result of the con-

the pure THF fluid with the intention to create a THF par- tinuous evaporation of THF molecules. Reproducing the

tially wet phase electrode-THF molecule-electrode struc- results within the same bending beam assembly is therefore

ture. In each type of experiment the solution/fluid is in- inherently not possible. For this reason only results are

jected into the cell prior to breaking the filament. The shown which have been demonstrated in multiple bending

molecules and THF fluid are handled under inert Argon gas. beam assemblies. The periodicity of the presented data,

Standard cannulation techniques for handling air sensitive the validated data on two SMU sets, the specific reproduc-

reagents have been used. Only at injecting the BDT/THF ing line shape of the oscillations and in some cases the

solution or the pure THF fluid into the cell, it is exposed demonstrated progression of the effects over a short time

to air. The following experimental way of work has been lapse, all should provide confidence in the presented data

followed in the described experiments:

despite the lack of reproducibility within the same bending

· The MCB setup is pivoted such that the liquid cell is in beam assembly.

upright, vertical position.

· The liquid cell is injected with either the 1 mM BDT solution or the THF fluid by a glass syringe with stainless needle, while the bending beam assembly filament is still unbroken.

· The motor is switched on while monitoring the conductivity of the filament, once the filament is broken the

4

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

3 Experimental Results
3.1 Field emission oscillations

the smallest possible one atom point-contact amounts to approximately h/2e2  12 k, which would show as a
vertical line through the origin on the scale in 2a.

Once the bending beam assembly filament is broken in pure THF, IV curves are as indicated in Fig. 2a. The IV curves show a cyclic voltammetry component, exhibiting a non-zero current at V = 0. Also structure in the IV curve is observed to reproduce at a voltage value which switches polarity once the scan direction is reversed. Towards higher voltages a more or less linear part shows in the IV curve which exhibits none or only minor hysteresis.

Fig. 3: Typical drying behavior of a junction submersed in a BDT/THF solution after the solution has been drained. The arrows indicate the continuous increase in conductivity over time. The inset shows the effect of the draining on the junction; a steep decrease in conduction at the point in time where the cell is drained, AuH, 4in.5.

The limits of cyclic voltammetry will be investigated under

the continuous reduction of the amount of fluid, until we

reach a single layer of fluid molecules, solidly adhered to

the electrodes. In Fig. 3 this is demonstrated during the

drying process for a BDT/THF solution. The effect of the

draining process can be registered during a measurement,

indicated in the inset of Fig. 3 as a steep decrease of the

current. In general a current reduction at draining of about

50-65 % is observed. After draining, the wet electrodes

and junction area will slowly start to dry which lasts ap-

Fig. 2: Panel 2a shows a typical IV curve after a junction is broken and immersed in THF fluid, AuH, 4in.5. Panel 2b shows data from a bending beam assembly in the drying
process after being immersed in a BDT/THF solution, re-
vealing enhanced conductivity and also similarity in shape to the curve shown in panel a, AuH, 4in.5. In panel c and d the conductivity of the two traces in panel b are shown.
Clear voltammetry behavior is visible.

proximately half an hour. The conductance of the junction increases continuously during the drying process. The IV curves can be recorded during this process, as the duration to take a trace is short as compared to the duration of the drying process. The IV curves in Fig. 3 are recorded at fixed time intervals for a positive scan direction during the drying process. Just after draining the current is approximately 50 nA at 10 V. Increases during the drying process to values of 3 µA at 10 V have been measured, prior to a

sudden conductivity decrease upon entering the completely

This IV curve is very similar in shape to an IV curve of a dry phase.

junction immersed in a 1 mM BDT/THF solution of which A law of nature seems to hold for two electrodes spaced at

the conduction at 10 V is approximately 100 nA see the nanometers distance during the drying process. Be it soft

inset of Fig. 3. These IV curves of devices submerged in temper Au or hard temper Au used as the MCB electrode

fluid are independent on electrode gap distance unlike the material, be it broken in air and after that immersed in

exponential influence on the tunnel current for a vacuum fluid or broken directly in a THF environment, the shown

gap. In this case we cannot draw any positional conclusion electrode behavior upon the drying process is the same.

from these curves as to how large the gap between the Once the excess fluid has been drained, the continuous

electrodes actually is. Crashing the electrodes into each increase of the conductivity is attributed to a constantly

other leads to a metallic constriction. The resistance of decreasing distance between the two closest points on the

5

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

opposing electrodes due to the lasting evaporation of the fluid on and between the electrodes. Apparently there is enough elasticity in the nanometers separated electrodes such that the exact initial separation does not matter. The continuously decreasing amount of fluid between the electrodes pulls the electrodes ever closer together. This process continues until the fluid is getting depleted, and a molecule is squeezed between the electrodes, blocking any further movement. The adhesion forces of the molecules (either BDT or THF) to the gold electrode surface, together with the partially wet phase layer which is lining the entire electrode-molecule-electrode system are such that a metal-molecule-metal junction is favored over a metallic junction.

The above also holds for electrodes broken in air where a metallic microscopic contact is re-established by reversing the motor action and subsequently exposing the junction to the solution. Once the solution is submitted the microscopic metallic contact is "broken" because fluid gets in between the electrodes.

Fig. 2b shows data from a bending beam assembly in the

drying process after being immersed in a BDT/THF solu-

tion. Although the conductivity has increased by a factor

of 10 compared to the value just after draining, there is still

a large similarity with the curve in 2a immersed in pure

THF. The conductance of the IV traces in 2b is shown in

2c and d. Typical voltammetry behavior is observed at the

structure between 1-2 V which reproduces in the opposing scan direction at opposite polarity. In addition an increase in noise towards higher voltages shows.

Fig. 4: Panel a shows an IV curve in the partially wet phase of a junction submitted to the BDT/THF solution. During the increasing voltage scan the transition to the completely

This is consistent with Fig. 4, which shows partially wet dry phase occurs at positive voltages. Panel b and c present

phase data of a junction which also has been immersed in the associated conductance showing clear oscillations at

a BDT/THF solution. In the conductance data in panel b negative voltages. Panel b also shows an increase in noise and c also an increase in noise exists for positive polarity towards larger voltages, AuH, 4in.5. in panel b. Conductance oscillations show in both panels

b and c, for negative voltages in excess of -4 V. In panel

c the conductance oscillations are bounded by a smooth

envelope, sometimes called "wave package" or "frequency Fig. 5 presents data in the partially wet phase from a bend-

beating". Oscillations in the conductance at voltages in ex- ing beam assembly which has been exposed to the THF cess of the work-function Au, approximately 5 V for gold, fluid. The IV curve over the full -10 V to 10 V range is

are well known and are usually explained in the context of shown in the upper inset, an enlargement of the central sec-

field emission resonance [29­31].

tion is shown in the lower inset. Also this IV curve shows

The IV curve in the positive scan direction shows a steep decrease in conduction which is typical for entering the completely dry phase. In the completely dry phase the THF is fully evaporated. The remaining molecules on and between the electrodes are strongly adhering to the electrodes and are now exposed to water and air molecules. The current is quickly reduced from a maximum value just prior to entering the completely dry phase to pA values in a matter of minutes. In this situation the electrodes are still in contact with undefined molecules between them acting as glue. After entering the completely dry phase the bending beam assembly can no longer be used as the electrodes are contaminated with undefined molecules and have been exposed to air and water molecules.

pronounced oscillations in this case however the current oscillates, showing in the IV curve as negative differential resistance parts. This is uncommon in devices where the electrodes are made from metal and where the density of states in the electrodes is expected to be fairly constant at the Fermi energy. It is posed that partially wet phase molecular junctions created in the way described above should not be defined by a fairly constant density of states in the electrodes. Current oscillations can also be observed in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b which details IV traces of two different bending beam assemblies in the partially wet phase after being exposed to a THF/BDT solution. The insets show the corresponding large scale IV curve for both bending beam assemblies. Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b show again "wave package" or "frequency beating" where alternating parts

of the IV curve do and do not show current oscillations.

6

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons
of Fig. 6a shows an abrupt transition to the completely dry phase near 8 V. Although gradual transitions to the completely dry phase also occur, it shows that defining the point in time where the partially wet phase ends is not difficult.
Normally the partially wet phase exists just prior to entering the completely dry phase. The transition between an increasing and a decreasing conductance is an indication that the completely dry phase nears. In addition, the partially wet phase in general shows oscillations in the current at larger (eV > Au) voltages.

Fig. 5: IV curve from a junction in the partially wet phase which has been exposed to the THF fluid. Oscillations in the current show over a substantial voltage range. The upper inset shows the entire IV curve over a -10 V to 10 V range. The lower inset shows the central part of the IV curve, AuS, 2in.

3.2 Oscillations in a THF barrier THF partially-wet-phase junction
In this section all devices have been immersed in pure THF fluid, after draining and drying the results are recorded in the partially wet phase. The bridging THF molecule(s) between the electrodes are considered constituting the tunnel junction barrier. The THF layer lining the device provides for the partially wet phase.

The experiments presented in the following sections zoom

in at a high voltage offset with a 1 mV resolution for a

1 V scan and a 2.5 mV resolution for a 2.5 V scan. Due

to the nature of the experiment and the short duration of

the partially wet phase no data for the large scale -10 V

to 10 V total IV curve have been measured. In general

the IV curve at large -10 V to 10 V scale for THF barrier

junctions can be expected to be similar in shape to the one

shown in Fig. 5. Data from Fig. 7 panel a, b and c are

measured for the same junction with about 1 min intervals.

In panels b and c an increasing and decreasing voltage scan

are part of the same scan, in panel a only the increasing

scan is shown. The curve in panel a starts with a steep

decrease in current, this "switch on" effect is followed by

a linear increase. Initially the drying process increased

the conductivity going from panel a to panel b as can be

observed by the current levels. Going from panel b to

panel c the overall conduction has started to decrease. A

clear pattern of oscillations is revealed. In a timescale of

several minutes the pattern changes with the overall trace

changing as a result of the drying process. The amplitude

of the oscillations is more or less constant for the larger

Fig. 6: Current oscillations are common in the partially stretches in panel b and c. Panel c in addition shows that

wet phase as shown in panel a and b, where both junctions the period of the oscillations is not constant. The lower

have been submitted to the BDT/THF solution. The insets curve shows periods from 21 mV at 9 V to 12 mV at 10 V.

in panel a and b show the entire IV curve over the -10 V In the upper curve the period varies from 14 mV at 9.35 V

to 10 V range. An abrupt transition to the completely dry to 12 mV at 10 V. Parts of Fig. 7 have been enlarged in

phase close to 8 V is demonstrated by the inset in panel a. Fig. 9. The line-shapes of the oscillations in the different

Panel a: AuS, 2in, panel b: AuS, 4in.5.

panels have a sharp "V shaped" minimum in common. The top part of the line-shape is rounded. The line-shape in

Fig. 9b2 is more or less vertically oriented, approximately

For Fig. 6a the oscillations occur at negative bias, for 2 minutes later the increasing voltage scan in Fig. 9c show

Fig. 6b they occur at positive bias. In both cases the oscilla- line-shapes leaning to the left while the decreasing scan

tions are occurring at voltages in excess of |4| V. The inset shows line-shapes leaning to the right.

7

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

Fig. 7: A THF barrier junction in the partially wet phase progressing over time. In panel b oscillations are seen to be developing near 10 V. In panel c, about 2.5 minutes later, these oscillations are developed at 10 V, AuS, 2in.
Fig. 9: The corresponding panels in Fig. 7 are enlarged. Apart from panel b1 which shows the developing oscillations near 10 V, the panels show sharp defined "V-shaped" oscillations of similar amplitude. The period in panel a is seen to gradually reduce for increasing voltage.

Fig. 8: Panel a and b show the "V-shaped" oscillations in
the partially wet phase. Structure of only 2 mV wide is
seen to reproduce in the oscillations. The lower curve in panel b is offset -1 nA for clarity, AuS, 2in.

A scan from 9 V­10 V with a 1 mV resolution in an alternative bending beam assembly is shown in Fig. 8. The line shape obtains a period of 12 mV at 10 V. An enlargement of the 9.75 V­10 V range from panel a is shown in panel b, where the increasing voltage scan has been offset with -1 nA for clarity. Also this line has a sharp "V shaped" minimum a spike of a single data point stands out on one of the flanks and reproduces over the stretch of the oscillations. This implies that a (1­2) mV feature is visible at room temperature and this reproduces. The line-shape in the increasing voltage scan is continuing, current-axis mirrored, in the decreasing voltage scan inclusive of the (1­2) mV features which are mirrored as well.
A scan which has been taken in 5 seconds in one direction is presented Fig. 10. The increasing and decreasing voltage scan have been recorded in one turn without interruption. A clear "switch on" effect is also present in this IV curve.

8

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

The amplitude is of the same order as the oscillations in Fig. 7 the period however is about 30 mV, three times as large as compared to Fig. 7b.

between 8 V and 9 V. Repetitive structure is present in both the increasing and the decreasing voltage scan. Panels b and c provide an enlargement, in panel c the lower IV curve has been offset -3 nA for clarity. Over 40 oscillations in the upper curve and over 30 oscillations in the lower curve are counted. Similarly as in Fig. 11 the shape of the oscillation for the decreasing voltage scan is current-axes mirrored of the shape in the increasing scan. The oscillation shape has also some resemblance to the line shapes shown in Fig. 11, there is a distinct discontinuous step present in every period. The periodicity of the oscillation changes from 12 mV at 8.4 V to 14 mV at 10 V.

Fig. 10: A deviating scan speed of 1 V in 5 seconds has
been used in the partially wet phase of this assembly to
capture these "V-shaped" oscillations which extend over the entire voltage range, AuS, 2in.

3.3 Oscillations in a BDT barrier THF partially-wet-phase junction

The junctions in this section have all been immersed in a 1 mM BDT/THF solution. All results are obtained in the partially wet phase, after the draining and drying process. The goal is to capture an island in the form of a phenyl ring from the BDT molecule, coupled via two barriers to the opposing electrodes.

In Fig. 11 an increasing and decreasing voltage trace is

shown for two bending beam assemblies, one in panel 11a the other in panel 11b. The lower IV curves with a decreasing voltage are offset -0.2 µA for clarity. The increasing and decreasing voltage scan are both part of the same scan. Clear discontinuous current steps are present in the observed structure. For the increasing scans a negative differential resistance section follows after each step, this section has some curvature before the next step occurs. For the decreasing scans the behavior is simply a continuation of the behavior in the increasing scan but mirrored in the

Fig. 11: IV curves in the partially wet phase of two assemblies both exposed to the BDT/THF solution. Similarities in panel a and b are discontinuous current jumps trailed by a negative differential resistance in the increasing voltage scan and trailed by a positive differential resistance in the decreasing voltage scan. The insets show the increasing and decreasing scans over the entire -10 V to 10 V range. All decreasing voltage scans are offset by -200 nA for clarity, panel a: AuH, 4in.5, panel b: AuS, 4in.5.

current-axes. The curvature of the segments gets some-

what steeper towards higher voltages, which coincides with

smaller voltage increments in subsequent steps. The insets

show the IV curve over the full -10 V to 10 V range the lower curve is also offset with -0.2 µA. The structure at positive bias does not reproduce at negative bias in both shown traces.

In Fig. 13 data from 2 additional bending beam assemblies a/b and c/d show a similar result as indicated in Fig 12. A regular pattern of peaks and discontinuous current jumps is clearly visible. Also in this case asymmetry in the peaks

Also for the high voltage offset BDT barrier junctions the indicates a negative differential conductance trailing the

scans are not accompanied by the -10 V to 10 V scan. current jump for the increasing scan and a positive dif-

These scans are similar to the ones shown in the insets ferential conductance trailing the jump for the decreasing

of Fig. 6 and Fig. 11. Fig. 12 presents data from a trace scan.

9

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

Fig. 12: A high voltage trace of a BDT/THF junction in Fig. 13: Panels a, b and c, d tie pair-wise to two bend-

the partially wet phase, the panels a-c show an increasing ing beam assemblies. Increasing and decreasing scans

enlargement. Similarities to the structure in Fig. 11 are replicate the main observations from Fig. 12. The lines

current discontinuities, trailing negative and positive differential resistance after a discontinuity depending on scan

indicating the slope are a guide to the eye. Panel a, b: AuS, 2in, panel c, d: AuH, 4in.5.

direction and current-axis mirrored structure upon scan

reversal. In panel c the current of the lower curve is offset

by -3 nA for clarity, AuS, 2in.

The complete (9­10) V scale of the data in Fig. 13a and b are presented in Fig. 14. Over 100 peaks are counted in this scan, the periodicity changes from 24 mV near the start of the scan to 6 mV at 10 V.

A markedly different line-shape is observed at the start of the oscillations in Fig. 15a with a scan extending from 7.5 V to 10 V. The initial line shape exhibits a very sharp "V" shaped minimum and a somewhat rounded top as observed in the previous section. For increasing voltages exceeding 8.75 V a "shoulder" is developing which is shifting with respect to the sharp bottom of the line as shown in Fig. 15b. Fig. 15c shows the development of a smooth line-shape into a more chaotic one, although the repetition of the sharp minima reflects the presence of the periodicity all the way to 10 V.

Fig. 14: A high voltage scan over a 1 V range, current discontinuities show as narrow spikes. The periodicity exceeding 9.65 V is regular as was shown in Fig. 13a and b. The lower curve has been offset by -5 nA for clarity.

10

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons
The transition to the completely dry phase is indicated in Fig. 16. A steep decrease in conduction, with a lot of structure, is abruptly transformed in a line without any structure. This is the point where the partially wet phase is expected to transit abruptly to the completely dry phase as for example also noted in the inset of Fig. 6a.
3.4 Large voltage range molecular spectra
In the previous sections it has been shown that some of the high voltage fine structure of the overall line-shape for THF barrier and BDT barrier junctions in the THF partially wet phase reproduce. Is it possible to also reproduce partially wet phase molecular spectra over a large voltage range?

Fig. 15: Although a BDT/THF solution has been used,

the line shape resembles a THF barrier junction. Panels b

and c show the increasing IV scan direction. The oscilla-

tions start of as "V-shaped" but quickly get more disorderly towards higher voltages, AuH, 4in.5.

Fig. 17: Large voltage scale molecular IV spectra of bending beam assembly a and b. Curves have been offset by

-0.4 µA for clarity. The inset shows how IV curve a has

progressed after 15 minutes, just prior to entering the completely dry phase, a,b: AuS, 4in.5.

Devices in Fig. 17 have been immersed in the BDT/THF
solution in the 4in.5 cell. Two consecutive voltage scans for bending beam assemblies a and b in the partially wet

phase are presented. The IV curves are offset by 0.4 µA

with respect to each other. For the increasing scans two

discontinuities are visible at negative bias for which the

amplitude and exact positions differs. The observed struc-

ture at positive bias shows some resemblance to what was

shown in Fig. 11. In this case there are plateaus, there is

structure on the plateaus, there are discontinuous steps as

well but the repetition is more irregular and less in number

as compared to the structure in Fig. 11. For the decreasing

voltage scans the structure at positive bias resembles that

Fig. 16: The partially wet phase abruptly ends in the de- in Fig. 11 in that the discontinuous steps are trailed by a

creasing voltage scan at 9.3 V. The irregular oscillations positive differential resistance, however the repetition is

show typical BDT barrier behavior. Once the partially wet more irregular and there are far less steps. For the scans

phase seizes to exists a smooth structure-less IV curve is the result, AuH, 4in.5.

in negative direction there is an inflexion point at approximately -2 V and -5 V. The inset shows how the IV curve

11

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

from assembly a has progressed over time after approx- ing their final shape the IV curves a and b1 were stable for

imately 15 minutes from recording the IV curves in the hours. Doubling the voltage scan speed, see curve b2, left

main figure. The structure has disappeared and the current the IV curve as is however the sub-gap structure near -1 V

extends to 3 µA at 10 V.

and 1 V, approximately doubled in height. The insets show

an enlargement of the central section of curves a and b1.

Fig. 18 shows the only data concerning H2O partially wet

phase junctions.

4 Theoretical Background and Discussion
4.1 One-dimensional conduction
From the data in section 3 it is clear that the conductance of the devices under study are of the order of, or well below 10-3 2e2/h. This indicates that the physics is described by transmission and reflection, deep in the Landauer regime [32]. Fig. 19 provides a schematic representation of the junctions which are studied.

Barrier

Fig. 18: IV curves in the H2O partially wet phase. Compliance was set at ±3 µA, the curves are offset with 3 µA for
clarity. The IV curves are very similar and are stable over

Fig. 19: A schematic representation of the junctions under study. The molecule is connected via two barriers to a quantum wire on either side.

hours. The sub-gap current is dependent on the voltage

scan speed as indicated by curve b2 which was obtained
with a double scan-speed as compared to b1. The insets
provide an enlargement of the central section for curves a and b1, a,b: AuS, 2in.

The central molecule is connected via tunnel barriers to the two quantum wires, extending in the x-direction with a length Lx, a width Lz and a height Ly. For a free electron gas the energy of the conduction modes in the quan-

tum wires is described by: En,p = Ec + n2y + p2z +

IV traces of two bending beam assemblies, a and b, with ( kx)2/2m, likewise the relation of the valence modes is an H2O partial wet phase are shown in Fig. 18. These given by: En,p = Ev - n2y + p2z - ( kx)2/2m, where junctions are created by starting off with a bending beam Ec-Ev is the gap between the lowest conduction band and

assembly immersed in a BDT/THF solution. The proce- the highest valence band, m is the electron mass and y,

dure in order to arrive at a molecular junction in the THF z are provided by: ( )2/2mL2y, ( )2/2mL2z respec-

partially wet phase as described above has been followed tively, n , p are integers > 0. Neglecting spin-degeneracy

to the point where during the formation of the junction the and taking Lz = Ly equals 8.6 Å or 3 Au atom diameters ambient H2O humidity was increased to 95 % by using a leads to 0.5 eV for y, z. The density of states of the standard humidifier within a contained environment also quantum wires is provided in Fig. 20a where the estimate

enclosing the MCB setup. The 95 % humidity level was for Ec - Ev is 4 eV, n, p runs from 1 to 4 and all modes

reached in a matter of seconds, the humidifier was switched are counted. It is noted that the inputted numbers are rough

off and the system was allowed to gradually transit to an estimates to be able to provide a qualitative picture of the

ambient humidity level of 60 % in a few hours' time. A conduction through a single molecule. In Fig. 20b only one

gradual transition from the default BDT IV curve (see for conduction mode is populated, the lowest n = 1, p = 1

example insets Fig. 6, Fig. 11) to the IV curves shown in mode is responsible for the conduction in this case the

Fig. 18 took place. The IV curves have been recorded in a higher energy conduction modes are empty. Finally in

continuous scan mode between -5 V and 5 V, the current Fig. 20c the filled valence modes are allowed to interact

level compliance was set at -3 µA and 3 µA. Once reach- and couple, leading to a smoother density of states as indi-

12

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

cated qualitatively. Derived from first principles Grigoriev et al. [33] arrived at a gap pinned to the Fermi level for a BDT molecule bridged between two Au electrodes, which supports the described experimental observations.

· Barrier 1 from the 1st Au electrode to the 1st S atom · Barrier 2 from the 1st S atom to the phenyl ring · Barrier 3 from the phenyl ring to the 2nd S atom · Barrier 4 from the 2nd S atom the 2nd Au electrode

Finally, the experiment allows and caters for this. Dissipation will in accordance with the Landauer theory take place far away from the molecule and quantum wires, in the electrode banks where energetic electrons will be able to get into thermal equilibrium with the lattice.

What is the experimental evidence in support of one dimensional conduction? To answer this question the process of how to arrive at partially wet phase junctions is detailed. The process is split into two: a formation process followed by a nucleation process. During the formation process excess fluid is slowly evaporating, BDT molecules are attaching to surfaces and the two electrodes are slowly getting ever closer together, continuously increasing the conductivity. The conduction still increases over time for a THF partially wet phase BDT junction, after the formation process has stopped. This increase is attributed to physi-sorption of one or more molecules to the bridging molecule. The increasing size of the central island leads to a denser energy level spacing thus increasing conductivity while still maintaining a single point of tunneling related to both electrodes. This process continues until the nucleated island becomes too big and starts to touch one of the two electrodes, creating multiple conduction points and thus losing the one dimensionality.

The data in Fig. 17 have been carefully selected to be sim-

ilar at a specific point in the nucleation process from a

data set of 20 different bending beam assemblies. The

Fig. 20: a. One dimensional density of states for a free data exhibit structure in the IV curve which disappears

electron gas, estimated input-parameters: Lz = Ly equals altogether into a higher conductivity curve by waiting 15

8.6 Å leads to y = z = 0.5 eV, Ec-Ev = 4 eV. Panel b shows the filling of the modes up to and including the lowest conduction sub-band. In panel c the valence sub-bands are allowed to interact and couple together.

minutes see the inset in Fig. 17. Even though the a and b

curves are not identical, they do show similar features for

the increasing as well as the decreasing curves. In general

the 2in

4in.5 cell shows more nucleation cell as defined by the conductivity

just prior to entering the completely

as compared to the
of the final IV curve dry phase. The 4in.5

For the voltage biased systems under study it is notable that almost the entire voltage will be biased across the molecule and associated barriers. The voltage over the quantum wire typically amounts to less than one or a few

cell can conduct 3 µA at 10 V for a BDT barrier junction, for the 2in cell a 1 µA level is the norm. This is attributed to an easier access of the junction to air molecules in the 4in.5 cell.

mV even if the molecule is biased at 10 V. This is due to The data in Fig. 18 stand out as halfway the BDT THF for-

the large difference in the total conduction with respect to mation process the H2O humidity was increased to 95 %. It 2e2/h of conduction per mode in the quantum wire. The is astonishing that this system reorganizes itself to a stable

density of states of the quantum wire in Fig. 20c is voltage molecular junction for hours with an H2O partial wet phase independent and will simply shift "up and down" with an layer. The collapse into a completely dry phase is not ob-

increasing or decreasing voltage bias over the contacts, served, nor is the nucleation phase observed. Apparently

even if this amounts to 10 V. Is 10 V not an extremely the H2O partially wet phase layer protects the bridging high voltage to bias a single molecule with? Molecules BDT molecule from other molecules nucleating on it. The

exhibit efficient tunnel barriers, capable of sustaining high fact that the H2O partially wet phase remains intact indefieV molecular energy levels. In addition, a single molecule nitely at ambient conditions is to be expected [25]. These

can consist of multiple barriers [33], for example a bridg- data have not been selected. The same reproducible en-

ing BDT molecule exhibits 4 tunnel barriers reducing the during end-state IV curves indicated in Fig. 18 result from

bias per barrier:

this experiment in 4 out of 8 bending beam assemblies.

13

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

The sub-gap current peak in the curves in Fig. 18 shows tial step at electrode 2 leads to standing waves at specific

voltammetry behavior: the current peak at approximately energy eigenvalues En in the well:

1V in the positive direction reproduces in the opposing

scan direction at reverse polarity. What is the source of this current? As the electrodes are not in the wet phase there can be no chemical electrode surface reaction responsible. The dipole moment of the H2O molecule is

En =

3 e 

2/3
2/3

2 2m

1 2/3

n-

n = 1, 2, ... (1)

4

expected to play a determining role. At a certain voltage

bias the dipole-moment of all the partially wet phase H2O

Electrode 1

Electrode 2

molecules on the biased electrode will direct themselves with their electropositive or electronegative side towards the electrode, depending on the polarity of the bias. These aligned dipoles will hold some opposite charge, residing

fAu n=2 n=1

on the electrodes, captive. Once the dipole is flipped by a changing polarity on the electrode all the charge that was held captive becomes available and creates a displacement

eV fAu

current proportional to dV /dt . From Fig. 18 it is obvious

that the flipping of the dipoles occurs in a range around -1 V and 1 V, releasing about 10-6 C as obtained from

integrating the sub-gap current peak over the time it was

measured in. Doubling the voltage scan rate in curve 2b in

Fig. 18 also approximately doubles the measured sub-gap

current which is consistent with an independent constant Fig. 21: Explanation of the Grundlach resonances. Stand-

total captive charge, released upon flipping of the dipoles. ing waves are able to build in the trapezoidal resonator.

Partially wet phase voltammetry can be used as a means The one dimensional density of states peak at the Fermi

of detection of H2O in for example the THF partially wet level is ideally suited to probe these states, explaining the phase layer, by studying the presence of structure at -1 V observed current oscillations in IV curves.

and at 1 V.

The two main experimental findings in support of 1D conduction are:

An effective electric field inside the barrier is represented by . At the surface potential step in electrode 2 there is no

barrier, the energy spectrum is continuous and electrons 1. Obtaining the same IV curves for multiple BDT barrier can enter electrode 2 at any energy above Au. Fig. 21

H2O partially wet phase junctions is a strong indication shows the junction conductance to peak whenever the bias that the same singular molecular junction is created. voltage reaches one of the levels En.

This is indicative that also the THF barrier and BDT

barrier THF partially wet phase junctions are of singular nature.

eV = Au +

3 e

2/3
2/3

1 n-

2/3

(2)

2 2m

4

2. The regular occurrence of negative differential resistance in the IV curves in section 3.2 and 3.3 also is a strong indication of 1D conduction.

In Fig. 21 the one dimensional density of states from Fig. 20c is included for electrode 1 and 2. For the vast majority of the data obtained from partially wet phase

junctions, created in the way described above, current

oscillations are detected. This is consistent with a one

4.2 Grundlach oscillations

dimensional density of states. With an increasing bias the

oscillations in the current in Fig. 5 for example, are ex-

Oscillations in the conductance as a function of energy in a planar metal tunnel junction biased with a voltage larger than the work functions of the electrodes were predicted by Grundlach in 1966 [29]. Grundlach oscillations, or also field emission resonances, can be viewed as electron standing waves in the resonator bounded by the barrier created

plained in a natural way. Whenever the peak at the Fermi level coincides with an energy state the current is maximized, if the Fermi level is in between states the current is reduced. At some bias greater than Ec - Ev the valence band states starts to gradually contribute to the current as well.

by the field on one side and the surface potential step on In Fig. 22 the peak number n and peak energy values are

the other side see Fig. 21. Gundlach oscillations have been displayed for data from Fig. 4c and Fig. 5. The workobserved in planar junctions [34], in high vacuum STM function from gold Au as well as the effective electric

junctions [30] as well as in MCB junctions at cryogenic field  can be directly determined from the interception

temperatures [31]. Solving the 1 dimensional Schrödinger with the energy axis and the slope of the graph respec-

equation with a trapezoidal barrier and a surface poten- tively. Values are indicated in the graph, the values for

14

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

 are low, work-function values are in line with what is reported in [31].

i on one side of the barrier to state f on the other side of the barrier. For elastic tunneling, where the energy of the electron prior to and after tunneling is identical, equation 3 is described in the following well-known form, at a voltage
V for the forward rate, (V ), only:

1



(V ) = e2RT

dEf (E) [1 - f (E + eV )]
-

(4)

Usually it is assumed that the electrodes are large on

an atomic dimension, to ensure the electrodes contain

a large number of free electrons and possess quasi con-

tinuous energy spectra. The tunnel resistance RT is defined by: RT = /(2e2 | i|Ht|f |2 D2), D represents
the density of states in the left and right electrode and

is expected to be approximately the same and constant, f (E) = (1 + exp(E))-1 is the Fermi Dirac distribution

at inverse temperature  = 1/kBT . In a full quantum mechanical description the tunneling electrons are allowed

Fig. 22: Energy of the observed peak in the IV curve versus peak index revealing the work-function Au as well as
the effective electric field 

to interact and exchange energy with the environment. For
example the system defining modes related to the charg-
ing energy may be excited by exchange of energy quanta e2/2C, just as other environmental modes may be excited

by energy quanta absorption from the tunneling electron.

The "beating" or "wave package" visible in the oscillations in Fig. 4c have been observed in various experiments [31, 35]. Fig. 6 seems to indicate a number of these wave packages however it is not only the amplitude being modulated also the period of the oscillations shows modulation. We expect on the basis of Fig. 21 the periods

Likewise the energy of the tunneling electron can be increased by transfer of energy quanta from the environment to it. Under the 2 conditions that RT h/2e2 (weakly coupled electrodes) and charge equilibrium is established: i.e. the time between tunnel events is larger than the charge relaxation time, equation 4 takes on the following form,

closest to zero to be the largest, with an increasing bias for the forward rate, (V ), [21­23]

away from zero the periods get smaller. In contrast we ob-

serve in Fig. 6a a decreasing period getting closer to zero and for Fig. 6b an increasing period for voltages increasing towards 8 V. Both IV curves Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b show regions where there seems to be destructive interference for a substantial voltage range. The full explanation of this

1





(V ) = e2RT

dE dE

-

-

f (E)

(5)

[1 - f (E + eV )] P (E - E )

behavior is unclear at present.

The corresponding physics can be described by a tunneling

4.3 What is the effect of the partially wet phase?

electron in an initial state with energy E having a multitude of probabilities of tunneling to a multitude of final states,

This is explained in the framework of the Fermi Golden Rule for tunnel junctions and the more generic form which takes into account energy exchange between tunneling electrons and the environment. The Golden Rule describes a transition rate between an initial state i and a final state f which correlates with the strengths of the coupling between the states i and f . The Golden Rule is used successful in a large variety of physical transitions:

thereby transferring an energy (E - E ). If (E - E ) is

positive the electron transfers energy to the environment,

if it is negative the electron absorbs energy from the envi-

ronment. Quantum mechanics teaches us that we can only

know the probability P (E - E ) of the tunneling electron

ending up in a final state E , thus

 -

P

(E)dE

=

1.

For

every initial state tunneling to a final state integration over

P (E - E ) needs to be performed. P (E) is provided for

a number of different environments in reference [22].

if

=

2 |

i|H t|f

|2  (Ef - Ei - E)

(3)

The delta function represents the condition for the energy of the initial and final states: Ef - Ei = E. Applied to the tunnel barrier the Golden Rule states that the transition rate if represents the transition from an electron in state

At this stage a "gedankenexperiment" related to the influence of the partially wet phase is postulated. It is assumed that charge is able to accumulate at the THF partially-wetphase/air interface. The charge is able to freely move at this interface, without being able to flow to the underlying metal conductor. Under these conditions the function P (E) in equation 5 is dramatically impacted since the

15

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

conducting layer at the partially-wet-phase/air interface The charging energy ECH to charge the junction capacieffectively prohibits any interaction of tunneling electrons tance C with one additional electron on top of the n - 1

with vacuum environmental modes. The device, enclosed electrons already on the capacitor relates to:

by the partially wet phase layer, provides for the only sur-

viving modes that tunneling electrons can couple to. In

other words, the device is caged. A miniature Faraday cage prevents tunneling electrons inside the cage from interact-

(Q - ne)2

ECH (n, Q) =

, 2C

n

-

1 2

<

Q/e

<

n+

1 2

(6)

ing with low impedance vacuum environmental modes

outside of the cage.

Q is representing the total charge on the capacitor. This

equation has been used for the single electron-box decou-

pled capacitor [36] it will in general define a decoupled

capacitor.

4.4 Continuous Q charging of a THF barrier THF

partially-wet-phase junction

A THF barrier/partially-wet-phase junction is schematically shown in Fig. 23c. The shield lining the junction indicates the junction is in the partially wet phase and thus shielded from vacuum environmental modes. The wellknown unshielded counterpart of this junction is shown in Fig. 23a.

a

b

c

d

Fig. 23: Schematic representation of a: a single junction, b: a double junction, c: a single junction in the partially wet phase, d: a double junction in the partially wet phase.

A sudden switch to a large voltage bias often leads to a

switch on effect as demonstrated in Fig. 7a. The current

adapts over seconds or 10's of seconds to the sudden high Fig. 24: Panel a shows the free energy or the charg-

voltage bias. Other presented graphs may not show this as ing energy from equation 6 as a function of Q. Panel

these graphs may be recorded during continuous scanning b and c provide data segments from Fig. 10 and 7b re-

after the first "switch on" scan. The switch on effect is spectively. Arrows indicate the scan direction. The

attributed to a redistribution of charge at the THF partially- continuous line reflects equation 9 with Iex = 13 nA, wet-phase/air interface. The partially wet phase layer is C = 5.5 × 10-18 F,  = 2.3 × 10-3 for panel b and

finite, it will stop at the cell wall and charge on it will try Iex = 6.5 nA, C = 1.5 × 10-17 F,  = 3.2 × 10-3 for to counter the electrode charge, acting as a capacitor Cd. panel c.

The reported systems may show a displacement current

Id = Cd dV /dt , or a continuous increasing current as in Fig. 8 or decreasing current as in Fig. 7b and c as a conse- The energy ECH is drawn in Fig. 24a as a function of Q for

quence of the stage the drying-process is in. The resulting various occupation electron numbers n. With increasing

drift in the measurements is a given, it does however not Q, the electron number related to the lowest energy state

prevent the study of the processes taking place inside the will increase. This is a continuous process, at the degen-

junction, which in general correlate to fast timescales in erate points there is a change-over to adding an additional

relation to the scale at which the drift takes place.

electron, only increasing Q at a fractional electron charge.

16

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

The curve in Fig. 24a equals the free energy F of the The following view emerges for the origin of this quantum

system, the energy able to do work. Adding electrons one effect: the energy E of the tunneling electron is provided to

by one in a continuous manner reveals the nature of the de-populate a filled Q state, to occupy that state while the

e/C periodicity.

remaining energy E is provided to the depopulated elec-

Only taking into account the contribution from the density of states peak at higher biases (eV > Au), the current through the molecular junction in a one dimensional conduction channel as indicated in Fig. 19 follows from equation 3 which modifies to:

tron. At a specific Q state, the energy values for E, E , and F (Q) are each separately identical for every subsequent tunnel event, enabling a coherent time correlated flow of tunneling electrons all sequentially involved in the same processes with the same energy transfers. Due to the existing THF partially wet phase layer, there is no possibility

for low impedance vacuum environmental modes to couple

if

=

2 |

i|H t|f

|2  (Ef - Ei - F )

(7) into this process, which would break up the coherence and destroy this quantum effect.

Where F is the free energy catering for the change from In Fig. 8 a minute feature with a width of about 1-2 mV

state i to state f . The matrix element i|Ht|f ties to both is observed to reproduce in the oscillations. The features

states i and f , it represents the strength of the coupling appear approximately half way in Q-space between the

between the two states hence | i|Ht|f |2 is proportional top of the oscillation and the degenerate points. In analogy

to F :

to the physics of SET multi junction devices this feature

is attributed to an excited state in close vicinity of the

| i|Ht|f |2 = F, 0 <  < 1

junction, contributing to the conduction by opening an ad(8) ditional conduction channel. In this case the exited state is

coupled via a Q state, being e/C periodic. The coupling It is possible that a number of states constitute an ensemble takes place via the free energy F in equation 6. The responsible for the observed quantum effect. For simplicity, excitation energy can be obtained directly by taking F transitions between only two states are considered below, at the Q state where the excitation is positioned, 0.5 meV

in this case the current contribution I1D = -eif yields: in this case. The capacitance related to the oscillations is 1.3 × 10-17 F, see table 1.

2e (Q - ne)2

I1D = -

2C

n

-

1 2

<

Q/e

<

n

+

1 2

Fig. 9c presents a somewhat tilted oscillation as compared to the upright oscillations in Fig. 9b. For the increasing (9) scan oscillations tilt to the left, for the decreasing scan a tilt to the right is observed. This change has occurred in

the 2 minutes timespan between the two scans. The mech-

The delta function in equation 7 equals unity for Ef -Ei = anism behind it is unclear at present. Coupling of the point
F . Equation 9 explains the origin and periodicity of the contact inductance to the charging modes may play a role. oscillations shown in Fig. 7-10 it also explains the "V From panel 7b a capacitance of 1.5 × 10-17 F was derived.

shaped" minima in these oscillations. The sharp minima EC from this contact equals  with  = (LC)-1/2 for coincide with the degenerate points at Q = (n ± 1/2)e L = 3 × 10-10 H. The 10-10 H order of magnitude for

of the free energy in Fig. 24a. A section of Fig. 7b and an inductance related to point-contacts is well known from

Fig. 10 is shown in panel 24c and 24b respectively. The superconducting rings interrupted by a point-contact [37].

current of these sections have been aligned to the voltage-

axis with the top of the oscillations by subtracting a linear

function. The current contribution from this linear function 4.5 Continuous Q charging of a BDT barrier THF

is from valence band states flowing into the empty continuous energy spectrum, above eV > Au. The capacitance is

partially-wet-phase junction

deduced from the periodicity  = e/C, from the current An ultimate quantum dot is created, where the BDT con-

extrema Iex, at (n ± 1/2)e,  can be derived. For panel ducting phenyl ring is weakly connected to the two elec-

b Iex = 13 nA, C = 5.5 × 10-18 F,  = 2.3 × 10-3. trodes. This double junction is schematically presented in

For panel c Iex = 6.5 nA and C = 1.5 × 10-17 F, Fig. 23d. The shield lining the structure indicates that it

 = 3.2 × 10-3.

is in the partially wet phase and thus shielded from vac-

The following two processes in this junction are dependent on voltage. The value of Q on the junction electrodes,

uum environmental modes. The well-known unshielded counterpart of this SET device is shown in Fig. 23b.

and thus the free energy F (Q), can be continuously var- The characteristic features in the IV curves in Fig. 11-14

ied via Q = CV . Where the electrodes are in closest are the discontinuities or current jumps. The large periods

proximity tunneling will take place, the peak density of trailing the discontinuities in Fig. 11 are rare, observed in

states pinned to the Fermi level will be located at an energy only 5 % of the bending beam assemblies. The smaller

E = eV . In scanning the voltage the density of states peak periods trailing discontinuities (Fig. 12-14) are observed

probes the free energy, F (Q), of the system via coupling in more than half of the bending beam assemblies. Even

to subsequent Q states in a continuous manner.

though the occurrence differs the similarity in shape and

17

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

slope is clear. Sometimes the periods are too small to clearly attribute a slope to, they appear as oscillations. For those discontinuities where a slope can be attributed it attains without exception a negative differential resistance for increasing voltages and a positive differential resistance for decreasing voltages.

The difference with the THF barrier junction is the conducting island which can only contain an integer number of electrons. The interesting physics of such a dot is that with an increasing Fermi level of the source electrode, the highest filled level of the dot will in general not be aligned to the Fermi level. The electrodes can obtain any Q value, the dot can only host n electrons, n being an integer. The capacitance as seen from the island consists of a capacitance to the source as well as a capacitance to the drain. Below the total capacitance C as seen from the island is used.

Also for these BDT barrier junctions e/C periodicity is

reflected. For devices where the single electron levels are small compared to e2/C the spin degeneracy of the levels

is lifted and the charging energy regulates the spacing [20].

With an increasing EF at some point an electron occupies an additional single electron level on the dot with an en-

Fig. 25: In panel a the two contributions to the free energy, charging energy and charge imbalance, are indicated to

ergy e2/C above the previous level. During the increase of the far left as a function of Q. The remaining curves ex-

EF and prior to the "electron to island tunneling" the free energy F increases as well. The Fermi level increased

press the combined contribution. Data from a segment of Fig. 11a are shown in panel b as well as the inverted and

above the last filled level in the dot. An imbalance is cre- scaled free energy curves after aligning to zero. Arrows

ated in the energy spectrum of the dot, less than e2/C. As indicate the scan direction.

a consequence F increases with this amount. This lasts until the free energy can be reduced by the amount e2/C,

at that stage an electron tunnels to the dot. By reducing

EF the situation is not invariant as also in this case the free energy is increased. In this case EF is below the highest filled dot level. When EF gets e2/C below it an electron

leaves the dot. At that point the free energy can be reduced by e2/C which it gained in this cycle.

This process is detailed in Fig. 25 and Fig. 26 where in

panel a the free energy is provided for the charging of the

capacitor as well as for the charge imbalance on the dot

for both increasing and decreasing EF . Both contributions

are separately indicated to the far left in Fig. 25a and the

far right in Fig. 26a. The remaining curves present the

combined contribution to the free energy. A section of

Fig. 11 a and b is shown in Fig. 25b and Fig. 26b respec-

tively, the data have been aligned to the voltage-axis with

the top of the periodic structure by subtracting a linear

function. Again, the current contribution from this linear

function is expected from valence band states flowing into the empty continuous energy spectrum, above eV > Au.

The positive and negative differential resistance parts in the

IV discontinuities naturally find their origin from detailing

the total free energy F , which increases saw tooth wise

both for increasing and decreasing voltage scans. The min-

imum of F was set at 0. The magnitude of F is 2EC. The function was scaled to match the current extrema in

Fig. 26: Panel a shows the two separate contributions to the free energy at the far right as a function of Q. Data

Fig. 25c and Fig. 26c.

from a segment of Fig. 11b are shown in panel b as well as

the inverted and scaled free energy curves after aligning to

zero. Arrows indicate the scan direction.

18

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

The capacitance is derived from the e/C periodicity, the 4.6 Capacitance reviewed

current extrema are obtained from the data providing:

Iex = 75 nA, C = 7.5 × 10-19 F and Iex = 130 nA, This section is deviating from the electrostatic capacitance

C = 9.1 × 10-19 F for Fig. 25 and Fig. 26 respectively. assumption. Defining capacitance at the microscopic level

The equations in section 4.4 are derived for a single junc- is complex. In one view [38] the characteristic time t

tion, caution is required interpreting a derived  for a the electron takes to traverse the barrier while tunneling

double junction system.

is determining the distance tc it surveys, c is the charge

Based on the free energy it is established that every e2/C cycle an electron tunnels to or from the island depending on

propagation speed. Nazarov posed a different view [39] where the time N , defined by N = /eV , is the relevant parameter for the junction-lead system. This leads to a dis-

an increasing or decreasing EF , since the free energy can be lowered by this energy amount. The resulting disconti-

tance N c, being surveyed by the electron. The high bias voltages up to 10 V in the shown junction results will lead

nuities are observed in the IV curves as current increases. In Fig. 14 for example over 100 electrons are tunneling

to extremely small N c distances as compared to normal measurements in the sub 0.1 V range.

in individual e/C voltage cycles to the island for an in-

creasing voltage in the range from 9 V to 10 V. Why is

the level spacing of the single electron levels so small in

a molecule where we expect eV levels rather than meV

levels? At this stage this is not clear. It is possible that

the interaction of the BDT molecule with the lining THF

molecules leads to many more levels as compared to the

original BDT molecule.

The data in Fig. 15 show many similarities with the smooth THF barrier THF partially-wet-phase junction oscillations with sharp "V-shaped" minima. No discontinuous current jumps are visible in panel b. Even though the BDT molecule solution has been used, it shows the unsuccessful attempt to create a quantum dot. It also shows that in being unsuccessful, most likely a THF barrier THF partially-wetphase junction has been created instead. It is possible that not the entire electrode surface has been covered with BDT molecules or that some molecules went down with both thiol groups on one electrode, the resulting IV curve is very similar to the THF barrier THF partially wet phase junctions. Panel b and c show a shoulder in the oscillations appearing and increasingly causing the regular oscillation to break up. Similarly to Fig. 8 this is attributed to excited states coupled to a Q state, entering the e/C window.

Fig. 16 provides insight in the criticality of the partially

wet phase. The IV curve shows a somewhat irregular struc- Fig. 27: A THF barrier junction in the partially wet phase

ture, for the increasing voltage scan the structure shows at where during one segment of the IV curve the voltage

least for a number of discontinuities a negative differential scan rate increased from 22 mV s-1 to 200 mV s-1. The

resistance. Electrons are tunneling onto the dot. In the periods of 7.1 mV are consequently enlarged to 66.6 mV

decreasing voltage scan electrons are tunneling from the while the amplitude remains similar. In addition a small

dot. This effect disappears abruptly once the partially wet oscillation is present on the large period oscillation. This

phase has disappeared in the lower curve at 9.25 V. What is also shown in the inset of panel a. Panel b is an enlarge-

happens to the hundreds of electrons that may be stored on the dot at this point? The nature of the quantum effect

ment of panel a, AuS, 2in.

disappears once vacuum environmental modes start to min-

gle in the conduction. The conduction becomes incoherent Fig. 27 and Fig. 28 show data of two bending beam as-

single electron effects are no longer visible. The hundreds semblies THF barrier junctions in the partially wet phase.

of electrons may remain on the dot, however the intricate In these IV curves the scan speed was modified from the and subtle difference of adding or subtracting them one by standard fairly low 22 mV s-1 to 200 mV s-1 for a few

one, gets lost.

indicated voltage sections. Fig. 27b is an enlargement of

27a, the IV curve in Fig. 28b was recorded just after the curve in Fig. 28a. In Fig. 27 oscillations in the 22 mV s-1

sections are visible. Increasing the scan-speed 9 fold is

increasing the period of the oscillations by a factor of 9

as well. For Fig. 28 a similar behavior is shown. In this

19

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons
figure the black parts appear noisy, however by zooming in it is clear that this is reflecting small oscillations, see for example the inset. The 9 fold increase in scan-speed also leads to an approximate 9 fold increase in period in both panels a and b, where the period of the smaller oscillations has been measured next to the increased scan-rate section. It is notable that the amplitude of the large period oscillations remains very similar to the amplitude of the original small period oscillations. The above described behavior on scan-speed change and amplitude has also been measured in BDT barrier junctions in the partially wet phase.

Fig. 29: Capacitance values from table 1 as a func-
tion of the used voltage scan-speed in the measurement.
The line represents an exponential fit to the data points; C = C0 exp(-8SR) with SR the scan-rate in V s-1 and C0 = 2 × 10-17 F.

Essentially the scan-rate of 22 mV s-1 is very low and close to the C0 value in a static situation. The dependence of period and capacitance on scan-rate may also explain the rare occurrence of curves as indicated in Fig. 11 which were measured at the highest scan-rate.

Table 1: Summarizing capacitance values and scan-rates of periodicity reflected in the various Figures. The last point is added and not reported in any of the Figures.

Figure Period Capacitance Scan Rate dQ/dt

(mV)

(F)

(mV s-1) (e/s)

10

29.2 5.5 × 10-18 200

6.9

Fig. 28: A THF barrier junction in the partially wet phase. 7b

10.9 1.5 × 10-17 22

2.0

Panel a and b show two IV traces recorded after each other 11a

212.0 7.5 × 10-19 444

2.1

where for segments of the traces the scan-speed was en- 11b

176.0 9.1 × 10-19 444

2.5

larged. The inset of panel a shows an enlargement of a 0.1 8

12.5 1.3 × 10-17 22

1.8

voltage section, AuS, 2in

12

13.5 1.2 × 10-17 22

1.6

13ab 9.2

1.7 × 10-17 22

2.4

13cd 7.6

2.1 × 10-17 22

2.9

Table 1 summarizes the results from Fig. 27 and Fig. 28 as 15bc 28.2 5.7 × 10-18 56

2.0

well as from all other figures where periodic oscillations 27

66.6 2.4 × 10-18 200

3.0

have been measured. The capacitance has been derived 27

7.1

2.2 × 10-17 22

3.1

from the periodicity e/C. Fig. 29 shows the derived capac- 28a

3.2

5.0 × 10-17 22

6.9

itance as a function of the used scan rate in the experiment. 28a

29.1 5.5 × 10-18 200

6.9

This graph shows that by increasing the scan-rate by a 28b

45.4 3.5 × 10-18 200

4.4

factor of 20 the capacitance is reduced by a factor of 20, 28b

5.0

3.2 × 10-17 22

4.4

consistent with the findings in Fig. 27 and Fig. 28 where not rep. 9.7

1.6 × 10-17 56

5.8

the period increased by a similar fraction as the scan-rate

increase.

Practically the capacitance can be described by C0 exp(-8SR) with SR the scan-rate in V s-1 and C0 = 2 × 10-17 F. The data in the preceding sections are still
valid, however now it is known that it would have been
different with a different scan-rate.

It appears that increasing the scan-rate reduces the N c distance, the horizon of the electron. This is reducing the capacitance. The scan-rate increase, coinciding with a proportional capacitance reduction, leaves dQ/dt constant, within the accuracy of the experiment. Fig. 29 shows

20

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

dQ/dt for the junctions indicated in table 1, the data the molecular device via the THF partially wet phase. In

points from Fig. 27 and Fig. 28 are pairwise highlighted, this case the charge gas follows a contour-shaped liner

indicating that dQ/dt remains constant at a scan-rate in- layer. The surface potential-trap is perpendicular to the

crease. The amplitude of the oscillations remains constant THF partially wet phase layer/air interface, see Fig. 31.

at a scan-speed change. The amplitude correlates to the The trapped charge carriers are free to move in the plane of

free energy in equation 8 which in turn correlates with the the lining layer, in the same way as in a 2DEG. Based on

charging energy in equation 6. The capacitance behavior the presented experiments, the fact that the partially wet

at scan-speed changes related to the periodicity appears to phase is a requirement to be able to observe these effects,

be different from the capacitance behavior related to the the analogy to the physical principle of a 2DEG at mate-

free energy scale.

rial interfaces, as well as the explanation and derivation of

Summarizing this section, the high voltage is plausible to play a role as to why single junctions are decoupled from the leads and display small capacitance effects. The mea-

the oscillations and line shapes in the IV curves, the only possible conclusion is that the earlier posed "gedankenexperiment" is in actual fact the reality.

sured periodicity/capacitance is dependent on the scan-rate.

At scan-speed changes dQ/dt remains constant.

Fig. 31: An impression of the BDT barrier junction in the

partially wet phase, not to scale. The blue/purple layer

represents the THF partially wet phase layer the red liner

represents the finite width of the surface potential trapping

charge carriers at the THF/air interface.

Fig. 30: dQ/dt as a function of scan-speed for the vari-

ous junctions indicated in table 1. The data points from

the three IV curves in Fig. 27 and Fig. 28 are pairwise

highlighted as they originate from the same IV curve.

The above does not imply that every partially wet phase

layer will have floating charge carriers, in fact for H2O

it was shown that the partially wet phase layer is able to

4.7 General discussion

hold charge at the electrode side captive due to the dipole

moment of the H2O molecule. It is simply not known at

One of the striking observations is related to temperature. this stage how charge at the H2O/air side will behave.

Why is it possible to observe effects in a single junction at room temperature where single electron tunneling is regularly studied at dilution fridge temperatures? Why is it possible to reproduce a 1-2 mV feature, measure sharp mV width "V-shaped" curves at room temperature where kBT equals 25 meV? The answers to these questions will probably have the same basis as the existence of this quantum effect. One aspect will be that the tunneling electrons are simply not capable of interacting with any other modes than a few device defining modes.

The high voltage and the THF partially wet phase seem to be a combined requirement for the observation of the reported quantum effects in the THF barrier and BDT barrier junctions. There are multiple experimental findings revealing that the Q-states are real: dQ/dt has been shown to be constant for a junction. The IV line shape of the THF barrier junction shows behavior as predicted by the free energy. Excited states couple to specific Q-states and reproduce over the oscillations with e/C periodicity. The BDT barrier junction shows expected behavior with

Confining charge carriers to a plane is not new; the two respect to tunneling to and from an island depending on

dimensional electron gas (2DEG) has advanced our un- scan direction. The voltage scan-rate couples to the inner

derstanding of science over the past 4 decades. Bandgap quantum mechanics of the junction, leading to scan-rate

engineering in a GaAs-AlGaAs heterojunction can create a dependent IV curves. Based on the above as well as the

potential trap for electrons in the surface potential perpen- combined presented results we feel confident stating that

dicular to the interface leading to a 2DEG at the interface the Q-side of the commutator has been reached. This im-

of the electronically different materials GaAs and AlGaAs. plies that the Schön phase, S, has become undefined and Here, nature provides for a perfect conductive layer, lining Q needs to be treated as a classical variable.

21

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

The effects of the partially wet phase on fundamental tun-

Supriyo Datta. Quantum transport: atom to transis-

nel properties are probably not restricted to molecular junc-

tor. Cambridge university press, 2005.

tions only. Small capacitance solid state tunnel junctions and compiled multi-junction systems, lined with a single molecular layer of a well-chosen gas, at cryogenic/dilutionfridge temperatures are potentially interesting devices. Almost half a century ago Kulik and Shekter predicted their voltage oscillations [7]. We are now on the verge of discovering the full potential of these quantum effects.
In the end Molecular Electronics will be unified with the ongoing device miniaturization by the partially wet phase.
5 Conclusions

[3] CJ Gorter. A possible explanation of the increase of the electrical resistance of thin metal films at low temperatures and small field strengths. Physica, 17(8):777­780, 1951.
[4] Konstantin K Likharev. Correlated discrete transfer of single electrons in ultrasmall tunnel junctions. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 32(1):144­ 158, 1988.
[5] HR Zeller and I Giaever. Tunneling, zero-bias anomalies, and small superconductors. Physical Review, 181(2):789, 1969.

A method to produce molecular junctions in the partially wet phase has been presented. In the partially wet phase the

I Giaever and H R_ Zeller. Superconductivity of small tin particles measured by tunneling. Physical Review Letters, 20(26):1504, 1968.

conduction of these systems is essentially one dimensional. The connection to the "known" has been established via observed Grundlach oscillations. Reproducible and longterm enduring single molecular junctions at ambient con-

[6] John Lambe and RC Jaklevic. Charge-quantization studies using a tunnel capacitor. Physical Review Letters, 22(25):1371, 1969.

ditions can be realized. At high voltages a quantum effect [7] IO Kulik and RI Shekhter. Kinetic phenomena and

related to continuous Q charging has been demonstrated.

charge-discreteness effects in granulated media. Zhur.

The THF barrier junction reflects e/C-periodicity of the

Eksper. Teoret. Fiziki, 68(2):623­640, 1975.

free energy. In the BDT barrier junction IV curve discontinuities reflect electron tunneling to or from an island. For a particular junction dQ/dt is constant and independent of the voltage scan-rate. Q needs to be treated as a classical variable.

[8] Eshel Ben-Jacob and Yuval Gefen. New quantum oscillations in current driven small junctions. Physics Letters A, 108(5-6):289­292, 1985.
[9] E Ben-Jacob, Y Gefen, K Mullen, and Z Schuss. Squid'85, h. lubbig and hd hahlbohm, eds., 1985.

The final conclusion is that the THF partially wet phase is responsible for shielding interactions between tunneling electrons and vacuum environmental modes.

[10] DV Averin and KK Likharev. Squid'85, h. lubbig and hd hahlbohm, eds., 1985.

[11] F Guinea and G Schön. Coherent charge oscilla-

Acknowledgements

tions in tunnel junctions. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 1(11):585, 1986.

[12] DV Averin and KK Likharev. Coulomb blockade of

We would like to thank F.L. Muller for many stimulating,

single-electron tunneling, and coherent oscillations

encouraging and constructive discussions.

in small tunnel junctions. Journal of low temperature

Not because it was easy, but because he had a conviction

physics, 62(3):345­373, 1986.

it was worthwhile pursuing, von Hippel had a visionary belief in molecular electronics. Up to this date we are discovering new physics in this field, progressing von Hippel's chess game to an interesting next phase.

[13] KK Likharev and AB Zorin. Theory of the blochwave oscillations in small josephson junctions. Journal of low temperature physics, 59(3):347­382, 1985.
[14] DV Averin and KK Likharev. Single electronics:

A correlated transfer of single electrons and cooper

References

pairs in systems of small tunnel junctions. In Modern

Problems in Condensed Matter Sciences, volume 30,

[1] Arthur Von Hippel. Molecular engineering. Science,

pages 173­271. Elsevier, 1991.

123(3191):315­317, 1956.

[15] Gerd Schön and Andrej Dmitievic Zaikin. Quantum

Arthur Von Hippel et al. Molecular science and

coherent effects, phase transitions, and the dissipa-

molecular engineering. Published jointly by the Tech-

tive dynamics of ultra small tunnel junctions. Physics

nology Press of MIT and J. Wiley, 1959.

Reports, 198(5-6):237­412, 1990.

[2] Juan Carlos Cuevas and Elke Scheer. Molecular Electronics: An Introduction to Theory and Experiment. World Scientific, 2010.
Supriyo Datta. Electronic transport in mesoscopic systems. Cambridge university press, 1997.

[16] Gerd Schön. Quantum shot noise in tunnel junctions. Physical Review B, 32(7):4469, 1985.
[17] A No Cleland, JM Schmidt, and John Clarke. Charge fluctuations in small-capacitance junctions. Physical review letters, 64(13):1565, 1990.

22

Decoupling environmental modes from tunneling electrons

[18] Theodore A Fulton and Gerald J Dolan. Observation [29] KH Gundlach. Zur berechnung des tunnelstroms

of single-electron charging effects in small tunnel

durch eine trapezförmige potentialstufe. Solid-State

junctions. Physical review letters, 59(1):109, 1987.

Electronics, 9(10):949­957, 1966.

[19] Leo P Kouwenhoven, Charles M Marcus, Paul L [30] G Binnig and H Rohrer. Scanning tunneling mi-

McEuen, Seigo Tarucha, Robert M Westervelt, and

croscopy. Helv. Phys. Acta, 55:726­735, 1982.

Ned S Wingreen. Electron transport in quantum dots.

In Mesoscopic electron transport, pages 105­214. [31] O Yu Kolesnychenko, Yu A Kolesnichenko, OI Shkl-

Springer, 1997.

yarevskii, and H van Kempen. Field-emission reso-

[20] CWJ Beenakker, H van Houten, and AAM Staring. Granular nanoelectronics. Plenum Press, New York, page 359, 1991.
[21] Michel H Devoret and H Grabert. Single charge tunneling: Coulomb blockade phenomena in nanostructures. Plenum Press, New York, 1992.

nance measurements with mechanically controlled break junctions. Physica B: Condensed Matter, 291(3-4):246­265, 2000.
Oleksiy Kolesnychenko. Experimental investigations of complex electronic states at metal surfaces. PhD thesis, Radboud University Nijmegen, 2002.

[22] Gert-Ludwig Ingold and Yu V Nazarov. Single charge tunneling: Coulomb blockade phenomena in nanostructures. Plenum Press, New York, 1992.
[23] Michel H Devoret, Daniel Estève, Hermann Grabert, G-L Ingold, Hugues Pothier, and Cristian Urbina. Effect of the electromagnetic environment on the coulomb blockade in ultrasmall tunnel junctions.

[32] Rolf Landauer. Spatial variation of currents and fields due to localized scatterers in metallic conduction. IBM Journal of research and development, 1(3):223­ 231, 1957.
Rolf Landauer. Can a length of perfect conductor have a resistance? Physics Letters A, 85(2):91­93, 1981.

Physical review letters, 64(15):1824, 1990.

Rolf Landauer. Conductance determined by transmis-

[24] CJ Muller. An experimental study on mechanically controllable break junctions. PhD thesis, University Leiden, 1992.

sion: probes and quantised constriction resistance. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 1(43):8099, 1989.

CJ Muller, JM Van Ruitenbeek, and LJ De Jongh. Experimental observation of the transition from weak link to tunnel junction. Physica C: Superconductivity, 191(3-4):485­504, 1992.
CJ Muller, JM Van Ruitenbeek, and LJ De Jongh. Conductance and supercurrent discontinuities in atomic-scale metallic constrictions of variable width. Physical review letters, 69(1):140, 1992.
[25] Daniel Bonn, Jens Eggers, Joseph Indekeu, Jacques Meunier, and Etienne Rolley. Wetting and spreading. Reviews of modern physics, 81(2):739, 2009.

[33] Anton Grigoriev, Jonas Sköldberg, Goran Wendin, and Zeljko Crljen. Critical roles of metal-molecule contacts in electron transport through molecular-wire junctions. Physical Review B, 74(4):045401, 2006.
[34] J Maserjian. Tunneling in thin mos structures. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, 11(6):996­ 1003, 1974.
[35] JH Coombs and JK Gimzewski. Fine structure in field emission resonances at surfaces. Journal of Microscopy, 152(3):841­851, 1988.

[26] CJ Muller. A pivoting mechanically controllable [36] Leo P Kouwenhoven, Gerd Schön, and Lydia L

break junction setup enabling partially wet phase

Sohn. Introduction to mesoscopic electron trans-

mcb-junctions, 2021.

port. In Mesoscopic Electron Transport, pages 1­44.

[27] James M Tour, LeRoy Jones, Darren L Pearson, Jay-

Springer, 1997.

deep JS Lamba, Timothy P Burgin, George M Whitesides, David L Allara, Atul N Parikh, and Sundar Atre. Self-assembled monolayers and multilayers of conjugated thiols,. alpha.,. omega.-dithiols, and thioacetyl-containing adsorbates. understanding attachments between potential molecular wires and gold surfaces. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 117(37):9529­9534, 1995.
[28] C J Muller, B J Vleeming, M A Reed, J J S Lamba,

[37] MC Koops, GV Van Duyneveldt, and R de Bruyn Ouboter. Direct observation of the current-phase relation of an adjustable superconducting point contact. Physical review letters, 77(12):2542, 1996.
[38] Markus Buttiker and Rolf Landauer. Traversal time for tunneling. IBM journal of research and development, 30(5):451­454, 1986.

R Hara, L Jones, and J M Tour. Atomic probes: [39] Yu V Nazarov. Anomalies of current voltage char-

a search for conduction through a single molecule.

acteristics of tunnel-junctions. Zhur. Eksper. Teoret.

Nanotechnology, 7(4):409­411, dec 1996.

Fiziki, 95(3):975­984, 1989.

23

