Quantifying Mn diffusion through transferred versus directly-grown graphene barriers
Patrick J. Strohbeen,1 Vivek Saraswat,1 Sebastian Manzo,1 Michael S. Arnold,1 and Jason K. Kawasaki1, 
1Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA (Dated: June 7, 2021)
We quantify the mechanisms for manganese (Mn) diffusion through graphene in Mn/graphene/Ge (001) and Mn/graphene/GaAs (001) heterostructures, for samples prepared by graphene layer transfer versus graphene growth directly on the semiconductor substrate. These heterostructures are important for applications in spintronics; however, challenges in synthesizing graphene directly on technologically important substrates such as GaAs necessitate layer transfer steps, which can introduce defects into the graphene. In-situ photoemission spectroscopy measurements reveal that Mn diffusion through graphene grown directly on a Ge (001) substrate is 1000 times lower than Mn diffusion into samples without graphene (Dgr,direct  4 × 10-18cm2/s, Dno-gr  5 × 10-15 cm2/s at 500C). Transferred graphene on Ge suppresses the Mn in Ge diffusion by a factor of 10 compared to no graphene (Dgr,transfer  4 × 10-16cm2/s). For both transferred and directly-grown graphene, the low activation energy (Ea  0.1 - 0.5 eV) suggests that Mn diffusion through graphene occurs primarily at graphene defects. The diffusivity prefactor D0 scales with the defect density. Similar diffusion barrier performance is found on GaAs substrates; however, it is not currently possible to grow graphene directly on GaAs. Our results highlight the importance of developing graphene growth directly on functional substrates, to avoid the damage induced by layer transfer.

arXiv:2106.01239v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jun 2021

Graphene is a promising monolayer diffusion barrier for applications such as oxidation resistance [1], metal contacts to semiconductors [2, 3], and semiconductor spintronics [4]. Compared to conventional diffusion barriers that typically need to be tens of nanometers thick, graphene can remain effective as a diffusion barrier down to thicknesses of several atomic layers [2], and in select cases a single atomic layer [3]. This extreme thinness is highly attractive for applications where a nearly electronically transparent interface is desired, for example, spin injection via tunneling [4]. Moreover, recent reports of "remote epitaxy" suggest it is possible to synthesize epitaxial films through a monolayer graphene barrier [5­7], opening the possibility of epitaxial metal/graphene/semiconductor heterostructures that would otherwise not be stable due to significant metal/semiconductor interdiffusion [8].
A fundamental challenge, however, is that graphene cannot be synthesized directly on arbitrary substrates. While graphene can be grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on Ge and noble metal surfaces (e.g., Cu, Ag, Pt), the high synthesis temperatures and catalytic reactions at the surface currently preclude growth directly on technologically important compound semiconductor substrates such as GaAs and InP. The use of nonnative substrates often requires post-synthesis graphene layer transfers, which can damage the graphene and create tears, wrinkles, and point defects. The impacts of this transfer process on effectiveness as a diffusion barrier have not been quantified, although the impacts of other intentional defects have been studied [9].
Here we quantify the effectiveness of layer-transferred vs directly-grown graphene as a monolayer diffusion barrier for Mn films, grown on GaAs and Ge substrates. The choice of Mn on a semiconductor is motivated by applica-

tions in spintronics. For example, the Mn-containing half metallic ferromagnets NiMnSb and Co2MnSi are promising materials for spin injection into GaAs [10, 11]. Sample structures consisted of a thin Mn film (1.64 × 1016 atoms/cm2,  24 °A) grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) on graphene-terminated Ge or GaAs (001) substrates. We evaluate two graphene preparations: (1) epitaxial graphene that is directly grown on a Ge substrate and (2) transferred graphene that is grown on a sacrificial Cu foil and then wet transferred to a Ge or GaAs substrate. In-situ x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements reveal that both transferred and directlygrown graphene suppress diffusion into the semiconductor substrate. Directly-grown graphene on Ge significantly outperforms the layer transferred versions, decreasing the diffusivity at 500C two orders of magnitude compared to the layer transferred version. We quantify the effective diffusivities and activation energies for Mn diffusion on graphene-terminated Ge and GaAs, and discuss mechanisms for diffusion.
RESULTS
Fig. 1 illustrates the differences between the directlygrown graphene versus graphene that has been layer transferred onto Ge. Direct growth of graphene on Ge (001) was performed by CVD at 910C in an Ar/H2 atmosphere using CH4 as the precursor, as described in Ref. [12]. For the layer transferred graphene, the graphene was first grown by CVD on a Cu foil and then transferred to the Ge or GaAs substrate using a wet etch and transfer method (Methods). The directly-grown graphene/Ge and layer transferred graphene/Ge have similar Raman spectra, including a similar D/G intensity ratio which is

2

FIG. 1. Defects in direct-growth vs layer transferred graphene. (a) Raman spectra of the two different graphene (gr) preparations on Ge (001) surfaces. (b) Corresponding SEM images for the (top) layer transferred graphene and (bottom) directly-grown graphene on Ge (001) surfaces.
commonly used as a metric for graphene disorder (Fig. 1a). Clear differences, however, are observed in the scanning electron micrographs (Fig. 1b). Minimal extended defects are observed for direct-growth graphene (Figure 1b, bottom), whereas extended defects such as tears and wrinkles are observed for the layer transferred graphene on Ge (Figure 1b, top).
Figure 2c presents in-situ photoemission spectra tracking the evolution of Mn surface composition for Mn films grown on Ge substrates, with and without a graphene barrier. Each sample was subjected to a series of anneal steps at increasing temperature up to 500 C. To elimi-

nate variations in sample alignment, all spectra are nor-

malized to the integrated Ge 3p core level intensity. For

the Mn film grown directly on Ge (black curves), with

increasing anneal temperature the intensity of the Mn

2p rapidly decreases, corresponding to a decrease in the

relative surface Mn composition. For Mn on transferred

graphene (blue curves) and on direct-growth graphene

(red curves), the Mn 2p core level decay is suppressed.

To compare the relative changes in surface Mn con-

centration, we fit the Mn 2p and Ge 3p core levels to

Doniach-Sunjic [13] and Voigt lineshapes, respectively,

and plot the relative change in Mn / Ge intensity ratio,

RMn =

(IM n2p /Isub )T (IM n2p /Isub )0

(Fig.

2d, sub = Ge 3p).

Here the

numerator with subscript T refers to the Mn 2p / Ge

3p intensity ratio after anneal at temperature T and the

denominator with subscript 0 refers to the Mn 2p / Ge

3p intensity ratio as-grown, before additional annealing.

This normalization procedure cancels out the instrumen-

tal sensitivity, alignment, and photoemission cross sec-

tion.

We find that the directly-grown graphene performs

best as a diffusion barrier, with RMn decreasing to only 0.7 after an anneal up to 500C, compared to RMn = 0.05
for the sample without graphene. Transferred graphene

also suppresses interdiffusion compared to the bare sub-

strate. For the no graphene sample there is a distinct onset of interdiffusion around 150C, at which point RMn rapidly decreases. There is no distinct onset for the

samples with graphene barriers. Together, these results

demonstrate that both transferred and directly-grown

graphene are effective solid state diffusion barriers for

Mn in Ge, and that directly-grown graphene is most ef-

fective.

We next estimate the temperature-dependent diffusion

length based on the relative changes in the Mn 2p / Ge 3p

intensity ratio, RMn. For a very thin Mn film on a semiinfinite substrate, the solution to the diffusion equation

is a half Gaussian composition profile (Fig. 2b)

cMn(z, )

=

ntotal exp 

-z2 42

(1)

where  is the diffusion length and ntotal = 1.64 × 1016 atoms/cm2 is the total areal density of Mn deposited.
We define the as-deposited initial condition such that the
Mn concentration at the surface (z = 0) is equal to the density of pure Mn, i.e. cMn(0, 0) = c0 = 8.2 × 1022 atoms/cm3. This yields an initial diffusion length of 0 = 11 °A. For simplicity, we let the Ge composition profile be
cGe(z) = c0 - cMn(z), assuming that pure Mn, pure Ge, and the diffused Mn-Ge have approximately the same
atomic densities and layer spacings.
From these composition profiles we calculate the ex-
pected intensity ratios for Mn 2p and Ge 3p, as a func-
tion of the diffusion length. The intensity of core level x

3

FIG. 2. In-situ photoemission measurements of Mn on graphene(gr)/Ge. (a) Schematic layer structure and measure-

ment geometry. (b) Half Gaussian composition profiles as a function of depth from the surface. We use this model to extract

diffusion length . (c) Mn 2p core level spectra for Mn thin films grown directly on bare Ge (black), transferred graphene/Ge

(blue), and direct-growth graphene on Ge (red) at increasing anneal temperatures, using an Al K source (h = 1486.6 eV).

Samples were rapidly heated to the anneal temperature, held for 5 minutes, rapidly cooled, and measured at room temper-

ature. Symbols are experimental data and curves are fits to a Doniach-Sunjic lineshape. (d) Normalized Mn intensity ratio

RMn =

(IM n2p/Isub)T (IM n2p/Isub)0

,

tracking

the

relative

change

in

Mn

surface

composition

as

a

function

of

anneal

temperature

T.

For

substrate normalization we use sub = Ge 3p. (e) Calculated Mn diffusion lengths  at each anneal temperature.

is given by


Ix = fxx nx,iexp
i=0

-zi x,imf p cos

(2)

where nx,i is the two-dimensional density of atomic layer
i, zi is the depth from the surface, x,imfp is the inelastic mean free path (20 °A for Mn 2p, 26 °A for Ge 3p, 22.1 °A for Ga 3p [14]),  = 0 is the emission angle from surface

normal, fx is an instrument sensitivity factor, and x is the photoemission cross section. We rewrite the composi-

tion profiles in terms of atomic density, nx,i = d  cx(z, t), where d is the atomic layer spacing, and calculate the

photoemission intensities IMn and IGe, subject to the

initial condition 0 = 11 °A. We then compute the nor-

malized

Mn

intensity

ratio

RM n

=

(IM n /IGe )T (IM n /IGe )0

,

such

that

fx and x are cancelled out. In this way, the experimen-

tally measured RMn is uniquely defined by the diffusion

length  after each sequential anneal.

Fig. 2(e) shows the estimated diffusion length, ob-

tained by fitting the experimentally measured RMn to the calculated intensity ratios from Eqs 1 and 2. We

find that compared to the bare Ge substrate, directlygrown graphene on Ge suppresses the diffusion length by a factor of just under 11 and layer transferred graphene suppresses the diffusion length by a factor 3.5, at a temperature of 500 C.
In-situ photoemission measurements for Mn on GaAs substrates reveal similar behavior as the samples on Ge (Fig. 3). For the Mn directly on GaAs (Fig. 3a, black curves), in the as-grown spectrum we observe a secondary component at higher binding energy, indicative of reactions or secondary phases between Mn and GaAs. This reacted component grows with increased annealing. We attribute these secondary components to the formation of Mn2As and MnGa phases, as has been observed previously at Mn/GaAs interfaces without graphene [15]. Comparison of the normalized Mn 2p intensity RMn and the estimated diffusion length reveal that like Ge, transferred graphene suppresses interdiffusion into GaAs.
We now use the diffusion length to estimate the diffusivity via 2 = Dt. Since each sample is subjected to a series of anneals at increasing temperature, we approximate the cumulative diffusion length squared after N

4

FIG. 3. In-situ photoemission measurements of Mn on graphene(gr)/GaAs. (a) Core level spectra and fits for

Mn/GaAs (black) and Mn/transferred-gr/GaAs (blue) at increasing anneal temperatures. Data points represent experimental

photoemission

results

and

the

traces

represent

the

fits.

(b)

Normalized

Mn

intensity

RM n

=

(IM n2p/Isub)T (IM n2p/Isub)0

,

tracking

the

relative

change in Mn surface composition as a function of anneal temperature T . For substrate normalization we use sub = Ga 3p.

(c) Calculated diffusion lengths at each anneal temperature.

anneal steps as a sum of the previous diffusion steps

N

2total,N = D(Ti)ti,

(3)

i=1

where ti is the time increment of anneal step i and D(Ti) is the diffusivity from the anneal at temperature Ti. Since each anneal is for a constant amount of time (ti = 5 minutes), we rewrite Equation 3 to solve for D(Ti) contribution of an individual anneal step.

D(Ti=N ) =

2total,N t

N -1
- D(Tm)

(4)

m=1

We plot the diffusivity D(Ti) as a function of temperature in Fig. 4. From an Arrhenius fit, D(T ) = D0exp(-Ea/kBT ), we extract activation energies Ea and diffusivity prefactors D0 as listed in Table I. We find that at 500 C, the diffusivity for Mn on directly-grown graphene / Ge (red curve) is a factor of 1000 lower than the diffusivity on bare Ge (black curve). Mn on transferred graphene / Ge is only a factor of 10 lower

D0 (cm2/s) Ea (eV) D(500C) (cm2/s)

Ge

6.0 × 10-10 0.81

5 × 10-15

transfer gr/Ge

6.0 × 10-13 0.50

4 × 10-16

direct-growth gr/Ge 3.0 × 10-17 0.13

4 × 10-18

GaAs

1.3 × 10-11 0.79

4 × 10-16

transfer gr/GaAs 5.2 × 10-17 0.21

7 × 10-18

TABLE I. Diffusivity refactors D0, activation energies Ea, and diffusivity at 500 C for Mn diffusion into Ge and GaAs,
extracted from in-situ XPS. We compare Mn grown directly
on bare Ge or GaAs, with samples that contain a transferred
or directly-grown graphene (gr) diffusion barrier.

(blue curve). Similar behavior is observed for transferred graphene/GaAs compared to bare GaAs. To benchmark the accuracy of our method, we find that our experimentally determined diffusivities for Mn on bare GaAs (Fig. 4(b), filled black circles) are in good agreement with previous experiments (open black circles) [16­18].

5

FIG. 4. Calculated diffusion coefficients for Mn on Ge and GaAs, with and without graphene (gr). (a) Diffusivity vs inverse temperature for Mn/Ge (black), Mn/layer transferred graphene/Ge (blue), and Mn/direct-growth graphene/Ge (red). Symbols are experimental data, the line is an Arrhenius fit. (b) Diffusivity vs inverse temperature for Mn/GaAs (black) and Mn/layer transferred graphene/GaAs (blue). The open symbols represent previously reported diffusivity for Mn on GaAs (no graphene) from Refs. [16­18]. (c) Schematic diffusion processes.

DISCUSSION
We now discuss the mechanisms for Mn diffusion based on the experimentally determined Ea and D0. Our experimentally determined activation energy of 0.8 eV for Mn diffusing into bare GaAs and Ge agrees well with previous experiments and DFT calculations for Mn interstitial diffusion into GaAs (0.7-0.8 eV [19]). Substitutional diffusion is expected to exhibit a higher activation energy of 2-3 eV [20].
In comparison, Ea for Mn diffusion into grapheneterminated substrates is considerably lower: 0.1 eV for directly-grown graphene on Ge, and 0.2-0.5 eV for transferred graphene on GaAs and Ge. We immediately rule out transverse diffusion through pristine graphene, since diffusion through graphene in the absence of defects is expected to have a very large activation energy barrier of Ea  12 eV [22]. This is because the effective pore size of graphene is small ( 0.7 °A radius of a carbon ring, less than half the radius of a Mn atom). Therefore, we expect that Mn diffusion through graphene occurs primarily through defect-mediated processes.
The range of measured activation energies suggests several mechanisms for Mn diffusion through graphene

defects may be possible. At high temperatures (T > 200 C, or 1000/T < 2.1 K-1), we speculate that our extracted Ea is lower on graphene-terminated substrates than on bare substrates due to reactions being catalyzed at graphene defects, since graphene defects are known to be chemically active [2, 21]. At this point we do not have sufficient data to determine the mechanisms of diffusion lower temperatures, T < 200 C (or 1000/T > 2.1 K-1, Fig. 4 dotted lines). The range of measured activation energies may also reflect a convolution of surface and bulk diffusion, in which Mn adatoms first diffuse laterally to reactive pinhole sites before then diffusing into the substrate (Fig. 4c). More detailed experiments with lateral and depth resolution, at a broader range of temperatures, are needed to fully understand the detailed diffusion mechanisms through graphene.
While a low activation energy barrier favors a large diffusivity, the origin of the dramatic decrease of diffusivity for graphene-terminated samples is the reduction of the prefactor D0. We interpret D0 to scale as an attempt rate for diffusion. For Mn on bare GaAs and Ge substrates, the attempt rates of 10-11 - 10-10 cm2/s are high because there are many available sites for interstitial diffusion into the substrate. On the other hand, at-

6

tempt rates are lower on the graphene-terminated substrates because Mn diffusion through graphene requires a defect in the graphene. This rate is higher for layer transferred graphene (10-17 - 10-13 cm2/s) than for directly-grown graphene (10-17 cm2/s), since the layertransferred graphene has a higher defect density.
CONCLUSIONS
Our results show that layer-transferred and directlygrown graphene suppress Mn diffusion into semiconductor substrates. The directly-grown graphene displays superior diffusion barrier performance due to a lower defect density. In our samples the Raman D/G intensity ratio is not a good predictor of graphene's performance as a diffusion barrier. Translating these performance enhancements to functional substrates at wafer scale will require direct graphene synthesis approaches on the substrate of interest. For example, CVD approaches using small molecules [23], activated precursors [24], or plasmaenhanced CVD processes [25­27] show promise for reducing the graphene synthesis temperature, and may be a route for graphene growth directly on GaAs and other technologically important compound semiconductors.
METHODS
CVD growth of graphene on Ge (001) and Cu foils. We use two preparations of graphene: graphene that is grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) directly on Ge (001), and graphene that is grown by CVD on Cu foils and then layer transferred onto Ge (001) or GaAs (001). For CVD graphene growth on Ge (001) we followed growth conditions described in Refs. [12, 28]. CVD graphene on Cu foils was performed at 1050 C using ultra high purity CH4, as described in Ref. [7].
Graphene transfer onto Ge (001) and GaAs (001). Our graphene transfer process is similar to other polymer-assisted wet transfers reported in previous works [7, 29]. The graphene/Cu foils were cut into 5 by 5 mm pieces and flattened using cleaned glass slides. Approximately 300 nm of 495K C2 PMMA (Chlorobenzene base solvent, 2% by wt., MicroChem) was spin coated on the graphene/Cu foil substrate at 2000 RPM for 2 minutes and left to cure at room temperature for 24 hours. Graphene on the backside of the Cu foil was removed via reactive ion etching using 90 W O2 plasma at a pressure of 100 mTorr for 30s. The Cu foil was then etched by placing the PMMA/graphene/Cu foil stack on the surface of an etch solution containing 1-part ammonium persulfate (APS-100, Transene) and 3-parts H2O. After 16 hours of etching at room temperature, the floating PMMA/graphene membrane was scooped up with a clean glass slide and sequentially transferred into five 5-

minute water baths to rinse the etch residuals. Prior to scooping the graphene with the GaAs (001) substrate, the native oxide is etched in a 10% HCl bath for 30 seconds. The GaAs is then rinsed in isopropanol and nitrogen dried. Prior to scooping with the Ge (001) substrate, the native oxide is etched in a hot (90C) RO water bath for 15 minutes. Immediately after the etching process, the substrate is used to scoop the PMMA/graphene membrane from the final water bath. To remove water at the graphene/substrate interface, samples were baked in air at 50C for 5 minutes, then slowly ramped to 150°C and baked for another 10 minutes. The PMMA was dissolved by submerging the sample in an acetone bath at 80C for 3 hours. Samples are then rinsed in isopropanol and dried with nitrogen.
Manganese film growth. Bare Ge substrates were sequentially degreased for 15 minutes in acetone, 15 minutes in isopropanol baths, and then etched in reverseosmosis (RO) water at 90C for 30 minutes. No solvent treatments were performed to the bare GaAs substrates. All samples were indium-bonded to a molybdenum sample holder to ensure good thermal contact. Samples were outgassed in a high vacuum load lock (p < 5 × 10-8) for at least 1 hour at 150C prior to transferring into the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber (P < 5 × 10-10).
In the MBE chamber, the graphene-terminated samples were further outgassed at  300C to remove residual organic contaminants, and then annealed at 760C (Ge) or 595C (GaAs) to remove surface oxides. Removal of surface oxides was confirmed via reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). For the bare GaAs substrate, a thick GaAs buffer layer was grown to smoothen the surface before Mn growth. No buffer layers were grown on the other samples.
Thin Mn films (1.64 × 1016 atoms/cm2) were grown at room temperature, using an elemental effusion cell. The thickness was measured using an in-situ quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) that has been calibrated through ex-situ Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS).
In-situ photoemission. Immediately following growth, samples were transferred through an ultrahigh vacuum manifold (p < 5×10-9 Torr) to a connected photoemission spectroscopy chamber. X-ray photoemission specroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted using a non-monochromated Omicron DAR-400 dual anode xray source (Al K: 1486.6 eV) and an Omicron EA125 hemispherical analyzer. The total energy resolution of the analyzer in the experimental configuration was measured to be 1.08eV using an Au standard. The photoemission chamber pressure was maintained at < 3 × 10-10 Torr during the measurements.
At each anneal step the samples were ramped from room temperature to the desired anneal setpoint temperature over 5 minutes. The sample was held at temperature (±10C) for 5 minutes and then rapidly cooled

7

to room temperature. Sample temperature was measured by a thermocouple attached to the sample manipulator, roughly 1 cm away from the sample. The thermocouple was calibrated using the melting point of indium and the arsenic desorption temperature of As-capped GaAs. The sample was transferred immediately following the cool down back into the photoemission stage before beginning the next XPS measurement.
Raman and scanning electron microscopy. Graphene was characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Zeiss LEO 1530 Gemini). Raman spectroscopy was performed using a 532 nm wavelength laser (Thermo Scientific DXR Raman Microscope). The laser power is kept below 5 mW in order to prevent damage to the graphene.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Mn film growth and photoemission studies were supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR1752797). Graphene synthesis and characterization are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under award no. DESC0016007. We gratefully acknowledge the use of Raman and electron microscopy facilities supported by the NSF through the University of Wisconsin Materials Research Science and Engineering Center under Grant No. DMR-1720415.
 jkawasaki@wisc.edu [1] M. Topsakal, H. S¸ahin, and S. Ciraci, Physical Review B
85, 155445 (2012). [2] S. S. Roy and M. S. Arnold, Advanced Functional Mate-
rials 23, 3638 (2013). [3] J. Hong, S. Lee, S. Lee, H. Han, C. Mahata, H.-W. Yeon,
B. Koo, S.-I. Kim, T. Nam, K. Byun, et al., Nanoscale 6, 7503 (2014). [4] E. Cobas, A. L. Friedman, O. M. van't Erve, J. T. Robinson, and B. T. Jonker, Nano letters 12, 3000 (2012). [5] Z. Lu, X. Sun, W. Xie, A. Littlejohn, G.-C. Wang, S. Zhang, M. A. Washington, and T.-M. Lu, Nanotechnology 29, 445702 (2018). [6] Y. Kim, S. S. Cruz, K. Lee, B. O. Alawode, C. Choi, Y. Song, J. M. Johnson, C. Heidelberger, W. Kong, S. Choi, et al., Nature 544, 340 (2017). [7] D. Du, S. Manzo, C. Zhang, V. Saraswat, K. T. Genser, K. M. Rabe, P. M. Voyles, M. S. Arnold, and J. K.

Kawasaki, Nature communications 12, 1 (2021). [8] T. Sands, C. Palmstrøm, J. Harbison, V. Keramidas,
N. Tabatabaie, T. Cheeks, R. Ramesh, and Y. Silberberg, Materials Science Reports 5, 99 (1990). [9] S. Oh, Y. Jung, and J. Kim, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 33, 061510 (2015).
[10] R. Farshchi and M. Ramsteiner, Journal of Applied Physics 113, 7 1 (2013).
[11] X. Dong, C. Adelmann, J. Xie, C. Palmstrøm, X. Lou, J. Strand, P. Crowell, J.-P. Barnes, and A. Petford-Long, Applied Physics Letters 86, 102107 (2005).
[12] B. Kiraly, R. M. Jacobberger, A. J. Mannix, G. P. Campbell, M. J. Bedzyk, M. S. Arnold, M. C. Hersam, and N. P. Guisinger, Nano Lett. 15, 7414 (2015).
[13] S. Doniach and M. Sunjic, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 3 (1970).
[14] C. J. Powell and A. Jablonski, National Institute of Standards and Technology (2010).
[15] J. L. Hilton, B. D. Schultz, S. McKernan, and C. J. Palmstrøm, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84 (2004).
[16] M. S. Seltzer, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 26 (1965). [17] J. Adell, I. Ulfat, L. Ilver, J. Sadowski, K. Karlsson, and
J. Kanski, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 23 (2011). [18] O. V. Vikhrova, Y. A. Danilov, M. N. Drozdov, B. N.
Zvonkov, and I. L. Kalent'eva, J. Synch. Investig. 6 (2012). [19] K. W. Edmonds, P. Boguslawski, K. Y. Wang, R. P. Campion, S. N. Novikov, N. R. S. Farley, B. L. Gallagher, C. T. Foxon, M. Sawicki, T. Dietl, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004). [20] H. Raebiger, M. Ganchenkova, and J. von Boehm, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89 (2006). [21] T. Yoon, J. H. Mun, B. J. Cho, and T.-S. Kim, Nanoscale 6 (2014). [22] O. Leenaerts, B. Parteons, and F. M. Peeters, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93 (2008). [23] Z. Li, P. Wu, C. Wang, X. Fan, W. Zhang, X. Zhai, C. Zeng, Z. Li, J. Yang, and J. Hou, ACS nano 5, 3385 (2011). [24] S. Lee, M. F. Toney, W. Ko, J. C. Randel, H. J. Jung, K. Munakata, J. Lu, T. H. Geballe, M. R. Beasley, R. Sinclair, et al., ACS nano 4, 7524 (2010). [25] R. Vishwakarma, R. Zhu, A. A. Abuelwafa, Y. Mabuchi, S. Adhikari, S. Ichimura, T. Soga, and M. Umeno, ACS Omega 4, 11263 (2019). [26] J. Mischke, J. Pennings, E. Weisenseel, P. Kerger, M. Rohwerder, W. Mertin, and G. Bacher, 2D Mater. 7 (2020). [27] N. Li, Z. Zhen, R. Zhang, Z. Xu, Z. Zheng, and L. He, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021). [28] G. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhu, G. Ding, D. Jiang, G. Qinglei, S. Liu, X. Xie, P. K. Chu, Z. Di, et al., Sci. Rep. 3 (2013). [29] H. Park, C. Lim, C.-J. Lee, J. Kang, J. Kim, M. Choi, and H. Park, Nanotechnology 29 (2018).

