arXiv:2106.00214v1 [eess.SY] 1 Jun 2021

Noname manuscript No. (will be inserted by the editor)
Game-Theoretic Frameworks for Epidemic Spreading and Human Decision Making: A Review
Yunhan Huang · Quanyan Zhu
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This review presents and reviews various solved and open problems in developing, analyzing, and mitigating epidemic spreading processes under human decision-making. We provide a review of a range of epidemic models and explain the pros and cons of different epidemic models. We exhibit the art of coupling epidemic models and decision models in the existing literature. More specifically, fundamental questions in human decision-making amid epidemics such as what interventions are taken to combat the disease, who are decisionmakers, when interventions are taken, and how interventions are modeled.
Among many decision models, game-theoretic models have become increasingly crucial in modeling human responses/behavior amid epidemics in the last decade. In this review, we motivate the game-theoretic approach to human decision-making amid epidemics. This review provides an overview of the existing literature by developing a multi-dimensional taxonomy, which categorizes existing works based on multiple dimensions, including 1) types of games, such as differential games, stochastic games, evolutionary games, and static games; 2) types of interventions, such as social distancing, vaccination, quarantine, taking antidotes, etc.; 3) the types of decision-makers, such as individuals, adversaries, and central authorities at different hierarchical levels. A fine-grained dynamic game framework is proposed to capture the essence of game-theoretic decision-making amid epidemics. From a vast body of works, we showcase three representative works with unique ways of integrating gametheoretic decision-making into the epidemic models. The uniqueness of each of these three works distinguishes themselves from each other regarding their models, analytical approaches, and results. In the end, we identify several main open problems and research gaps left to be addressed and filled. Keywords Dynamic Games · Stochastic Games · Infectious Diseases · Epidemic Spreading · Human-in-the-Loop Systems · COVID-19
Y. Huang and Q. Zhu 370 Jay Street, Brooklyn, New York, United States E-mail: {yh.huang, qz494}@nyu.com

2

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1.1 Mathematical Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Epidemic Models & Decision Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2.1 Epidemic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2.1.1 Stochastic versus Deterministic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2.1.2 Deterministic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2.1.3 Stochastic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 2.2 Decision Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.2.1 What Interventions to Take? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.2.2 How are Interventions Modelled? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 2.2.3 When are Interventions Taken? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 2.2.4 Who are the Decision Makers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 2.2.5 Information Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3 Game-Theoretic Decision Making in Epidemics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 3.1 A Multi-Dimensional Taxonomy of Game-Theoretic Models in Epidemics . . . 18 3.2 A Fine-Grained Dynamic Game Framework for Human-in-the-Loop Epidemic Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3.3 Social Distancing Game with Homogeneous SIR Epidemic Model [90] . . . . . 24 3.3.1 Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3.3.2 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3.3.3 Highlighted Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 3.3.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 3.4 The Power of Empathy: A Markov Game under the Myopic Equilibrium [26] . 30 3.4.1 Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 3.4.2 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 3.4.3 Highlighted Results: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 3.4.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 3.5 Individual Weight Adaptation: An  -Player Differential Game [57] . . . . . . 34 3.5.1 Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 3.5.2 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 3.5.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 3.5.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4 Future Envision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 4.1 The Justification of Game Theoretic Methods for Deterministic Models . . . . 39 4.2 The Role of the Central Authority: Mechanism Design and Information Design 40 4.3 Information Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 4.4 Human are not Completely Rational . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

1 Introduction
The advancement of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and transportation technologies has been connecting entities, including people and devices, in various ways and improving the quality of lives globally. While benefiting from increasing connectivity, we have also experienced several toxic "side effects" that are bought by hidden spreading processes over the underlying networks. Such processes include the spread of contagious diseases over human contact networks and animal populations, the diffusion of viruses or worms over communication and computer networks, and the propagation of rumors/fake news over social media. The recent COVID-19 pandemic, which has been taking a devastating toll on the physical and economic well-being of

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

people across the world, needs more earnest heed to these processes. Certainly, a fundamental understanding of the evolution and control of these processes will contribute to alleviating the threats to the safety, well-being, and security of people and other interconnected systems around the world.
The underlying networks on which these processes spread are usually largescale complex networks composed of intelligent and strategic individuals with different beliefs, perceptions, and objectives. The scale and complexity of the underlying networks, the unpredictability of individuals' behavior, and the unavailability of accurate and timely data pose challenges to the fundamental understanding of the evolution and control of these processes.
The inclusion of human decision-makers in the epidemic spreading process creates challenges. It becomes a significant hurdle for researchers to understand human-in-the-loop spreading processes at a fundamental level. The key to clear this hurdle is to integrate decision models into epidemic models. Mathematical models of epidemic spreading started 200 years ago by Daniel Bernoulli [12], at the dawn of the industrial revolution. Many works have been dedicated to the modeling of epidemic spreading over the last 200 years. But not until very recent years has there been works investigating human decision-making amid epidemics and the effect of human responses on the spreading processes. In this review, we review and present various solved and open problems in developing, analyzing, and mitigating the epidemic spreading process with human decisionmaking. We provide a tutorial on epidemic models and the pros and cons of different epidemic models. We explain in detail how decision models are introduced and integrated into epidemic models in the existing literature. For example, we provide concrete examples regarding what interventions can be taken by individuals and the central authority to fight against the epidemic, when interventions are taken, and how interventions are modeled.
Among various decision models, game-theoretic models have become prominent in modeling human responses/behavior amid epidemics in the last decade. The popularity of game-theoretic models for human-in-the-loop epidemics is primarily due to the following reasons. One rationale is the large-scale nature of the human population. Centralized decision-making becomes intractable in a large-scale network. Game-theoretic models provide a bottom-up decentralized modeling framework that naturally makes the computation and design scalable. The second one is that individuals living amid an epidemic may not be willing to comply with the suggested protocols, and individuals are mostly self-interested. The third one is that game theory as a mature and extensive field offers a set of relevant concepts and analytical techniques that can be leveraged to study human behavior amid epidemics. In this review, we demonstrate that game-theoretic frameworks are powerful in modeling the spreading processes of human-in-the-loop epidemics. We provide a multi-dimensional taxonomy of the existing literature that has proposed, studied, and analyzed game-theoretic models for human-in-the-loop epidemics. Among existing literature, we showcase three representative works with unique ways of integrating game-theoretic decision-making into the epidemic models. The uniqueness of

4

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

each of these three works distinguishes them from each other by means of their models, analytical methods, and results.
Despite a recent surge in the literature about game-theoretic models for studying the human-in-the-loop epidemic spreading, a number of open problems and research gaps are left to be addressed and filled. Hence, we use one section to discuss emerging topics. As we continue to witness the devastating toll of the pandemic on human society, this review aims to introduce to more researchers, especially game and dynamic game theorists the subject of game-theoretic modeling of human-in-the-loop epidemic spreading processes. Their contributions to understanding and mitigating the human-in-the-loop epidemic spreading would make a significant societal impact.

1.1 Mathematical Preliminaries

Graph Theory: A directed graph (network) is a pair G = (N , E), where N is the

set of nodes representing individuals involved and E  N ×N is the set of edges

representing connections between two individuals. The size of the network is

 = |N |. Given G, an edge from node   N to node   N is denoted by (, ).

When (, )  E implies ( , )  E and vice versa, the graph G is undirected.

For an undirected network, we define N as the set of neighbors of node  as

N

=

{  |(,

)



E}.

For

a

directed

network,

we

denote

 


the

out-neighbor

set of individual , which is defined as N = {  |( , )  E}. Let   R × the

adjacency matrix for a unweighted graph G with elements   = 1 if and only

if (1, )  E. Otherwise,   = 0. For an unweighted network, we use  as the

adjacency matrix with elements    R+.

The number of neighbors a node has is the degree of this node denoted by

. Given a graph G, () is the proportion of nodes who have degree . The

average degree of a graph is denoted by 

  (). Let 2 =  2().

If G is a scale-free graph, its degree distribution follows ()  - with 

ranges from 2 to 3. If G is a regular graph, then each node in G has the same

degree.

Notation: For a square matrix ,  () is the spectral radius of matrix . Given a vector (1, 2, · · · ,  ), diag(1, 2, · · · ,  ) is an  ×  matrix whose elements on the -th row and the -th column is . The identity matrix is denoted by . We use E[·] and P(·) to denote the expected value and the probability of the argument. Given x = (1, 2, · · · ,  ), x- denotes the vector x removing element . Given a graph G and a vector associated with its nodes x = (1, 2, · · · ,  ), xN denotes the vector that includes all the elements associated with node or individual  and its neighbors. Let  be the probability simplex of dimension , i.e.,  = {  R|1 + 2 + · · · ,  = 1,   0,  = 1, 2, · · · , }

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework consisting of epidemic processes and decision models.

Fig. 2 A taxonomic summary of well-known epidemic models and their connection.
2 Epidemic Models & Decision Models
To understand the evolution and control of epidemic spreading at a fundamental level, we need to understand both the epidemic model and the decision model, and the art of coupling these two models.

6

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

2.1 Epidemic Models

The spreading of infectious diseases has affected human civilization since the age of nomadic hunter-gatherers. Mathematical models of epidemic spreading started to be proposed and studied since the beginning of the industrial revolution, with one of the earliest attempts to model infectious disease transmission mathematically by Daniel Bernoulli [12]. Over the last 200 years, many mathematical models of epidemics have been proposed and analyzed [6,24,78,82,105].

Compartment Models: The basic models of many mathematical modeling of epidemics are the well-known compartment models [61]. In compartment models, every subject, based on the status, belongs to some compartment of the population at any given time. Common compartments include the susceptible (S), the exposed (E), the infected (I), the asymptomatic (A), and the recovered (R). Depending on the mechanisms of infectious diseases, different compartment epidemic models such as SIS (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered), SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered), and SEIR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered) are studied and analyzed. Some infections, such as the common cold and influenza, do not confer any long-lasting immunity. Such infections can be modeled by the SIS model since individuals can become susceptible again after their recovery. If individuals recover with permanent immunity, the model is an SIR model. The SIR model has been used to study infectious diseases such as measles, mumps, and smallpox [61]. Many variants of compartment models have been proposed and studied in the past decades. For example, Rothe et al. [94] have looked into an SAIRS (susceptible-asymptomatic-infected-recoveredsusceptible) to model the COVID-19 pandemic; Erdem et al. [27] have investigated an SIQR (susceptible-asymptomatic-infected-quarantine-recovered) to study the effect of imperfect quarantine on the spreading of an influenza epidemic; Huang et al. [53] have proposed a model that connects the SIS and the SIR models, in which once recovered from infection, individuals become less susceptible to the disease.

2.1.1 Stochastic versus Deterministic Models
To capture the dynamics of the epidemic spreading process, we need a dynamic model to describe the evolution of the population in each compartment. In general, epidemic models are categorized into two groups: deterministic epidemic models and stochastic epidemic models, depending on the mathematical formulation. Deterministic models, oftentimes represented by a collection of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), have perhaps received more attention in the literature [61,78, 82,105]. Their popularity is because deterministic models can become more complex yet still feasible to analyze, at least when numerical results are sufficient. In contrast, stochastic models, usually represented by Markov processes, need to be fairly simple to be mathematically manageable [6, 24].

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

There are, however, several advantages of stochastic epidemic models over deterministic epidemic models when the analysis is tractable. First, the epidemic spreading processes are stochastic by nature. For example, the disease transmission between individuals is more spontaneously described by probabilities than deterministic rules that govern the transmission. Second, stochastic modeling has its deterministic counterpart through mean-field analysis. The stochastic modeling provides a microscopic description of the epidemic process, while the deterministic counterpart is useful to describe the spreading of epidemics at a macroscopic level, e.g., the fraction of the infected population at a given time. When the number of individual  is small, or the size of the infection is small in a large community, the mean-field approximation will experience a considerable approximation error, and hence deterministic models may fail to accurately describe the spreading process [105]. Third, deterministic models are incapable of capturing higher-order characteristics of the spreading process, such as variances, which are useful for the understanding of the uncertainties in the estimates.
Overall, deterministic models and stochastic ones are complementary to each other. Deterministic models describe the spreading process at a macroscopic level and are more manageable mathematically, yet subject to assumptions on the spreading processes. Stochastic models approach the spreading processes from a microscopic point of view and offer a detailed description of the spreading process. In the following subsections, we introduce both deterministic and stochastic models using the SIS epidemic models as examples.

2.1.2 Deterministic Models
Over the last century, increasingly sophisticated deterministic epidemic models have been proposed to capture the spreading processes on growingly complex and realistic networks.
In an SIS model, each individual in the system is either infected or susceptible. An infected node can infect its susceptible neighbors with an infection rate . An infected individual recovers with recovery rate . Once recovered, the individual is again prone to the disease. The simplest deterministic SIS model is introduced by Kermack and McKendrick [61]:
 = -()() + (), (1)
 = ()() - (),
where () is the fraction of the population who are susceptible,  () is the fraction of the infected. In 1, the rate at which the fraction of infected individuals evolve, is determined by the rate at which the infected population are recovered, i.e.,  () and the rate at which the fraction of infected population grows, i.e., () (). The latter rate captures the encounter between the fraction of susceptible individuals and the fraction of infected individuals. Simple deterministic models like (1) assume the individuals in the population are homogeneously mixed, i.e., each individual is equally likely to encounter every other node. Such models neglect the structure of the underlying network.

8

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Starting from 90s, new deterministic models have been proposed and studied to accommodate epidemic processes over more complex and more realistic network structures. Kerphart and White [60] investigated a regular graph with  individuals where each individual has degree . The Kerphart and White model is described by the ODE:

 = ()[1 - ()] - (),

(2)

where the rate of infection is   () (1 -  ()) which is proportional to the fraction of susceptible individuals, i.e., 1-  (). For each susceptible individual, the rate of infection is the product of the infection rate  and the number of infected neighbors   (). The Kermack and McKendrick model (1) and the Kerphart and White model (2) are referred to as "homogeneous" models since such models assume the underlying network has homogeneous degree distribution, i.e., each node in the network has almost the same degree.
With the emerging occurrence of complex networks in many social, biological, and communication systems, it is of great interest to investigate the effect of their features on epidemic and disease spreading. Pastor-Satorras et al. [81, 82] studied the spreading of epidemics on scale-free (SF) networks. In SF networks, the probability that an individual has degree  follows a scalefree distribution ()  -, with  ranges from 2 to 3. It is shown that many social networks such as collaboration networks, and computer networks such as the Internet and the World Wide Web exhibit such structure properties. The Pastor-Satorras model further divide individuals into sub-compartments based on their degrees, with  () representing the proportion of infected individuals with a given degree :

 =  [1 -  ()]() -  (),

(3)

where

() =   () ()    ( )

represents the probability that any given link points to an infected individual.

The rate at which the infected population grows is proportional to the infection rate , the number of connections , and the probability () of linking to an infected individual. The model of Pastor-Satorras et al. incorporates the degree distribution of the underlying network and provides approximation of the spreading processes on more complex and realistic networks.
To incorporate an arbitrary network characterized by the adjacency matrix , Wang et al. [107] proposes a discrete-time model that generalizes the Kerphart and White model (2) and the model of Pastor-Satorras et al.

(3). Mieghem et al. [105] studied a continuous-time SIS model, called the

-intertwined deterministic model that generalizes the results in [107]. The -intertwined deterministic model describes the spreading processes by





 = [1 -  ()]      () -   (),  = 1, 2, · · · ,  .

(4)

 =1

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

where  denotes the probability of individual  being infected [105] or the proportion of infected individuals in the sub-population  [28]. The element   in the adjacency matrix represents the connectivity between individual  and individual . The -intertwined deterministic model provide microscopic description of the spreading processes by incorporating the adjacency matrix that fully characterize the underlying network. Other variants of the -intertwined deterministic model (4) has been studied. To capture the heterogeneity of individuals' demographic or health situation, people consider a -intertwined model with heterogeneous parameters:





 = [1 -  ()]      () -   (),  = 1, 2, · · · , ,

(5)

 =1

where  describes the infection rate of individual  and  represents the recovery rate of individual . Khanafer et al. considers an -intertwined mode in a directed network [62]. Par´e et al. extended the -intertwined deterministic model to accommodate time-varying networks [79].
Most studies of deterministic epidemic models focus on analyzing the system equilibria (the limit behavior of the spreading process as time reaches infinity), characterizing the threshold that determines which equilibrium the system converges to, and evaluating stability properties of different equilibria [60, 78, 81, 105, 107]. Specially, conditions for the existence of and convergence to "disease free" or "endemic free" (endemic state) equilibria and the stability properties of these equilibria have been sought. Define the effective spreading rate  /. One of the primary goals in most studies of deterministic epidemic models is to characterize the threshold . If  > , the epidemic persists and at least a nonzero proportion of the individuals are infected, whereas for   , the epidemic dies out. The Kerphart and White model (2) gives a "steady-state" epidemic threshold ,KW = 1/, which is inversely proportional to the individuals' degree in a regular graph [60]. The model of Pastor-Satorras et al. (3) provides a threshold ,PS =  / 2 , with  =   ( ) and 2 =   2( ), which exhibits an absence of epidemic threshold in SF networks for which 2  . The epidemic threshold for the -intertwined deterministic model (4) is specified by ,VPM = 1/ ( ), where  ( ) the special radius of the adjacency matrix  [105]. When it comes to the heterogeneous -intertwined deterministic model (5), the infectious disease will die out if  ( - )  0. Otherwise, an outbreak will occur. Here,  = diag(1, 2, · · · ,  ),  = diag(1, 2, · · · ,  ), and  is the adjacency matrix of the underlying network. For a comprehensive review of deterministic epidemic models, their epidemic thresholds and stability properties, one can refer to [75, 78].

2.1.3 Stochastic Models [Stochastic models general introduction]

10

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

In this subsection, we present popular stochastic epidemic models based on SIS compartment models. Examples for SIR type of epidemics can be formulated similarly. First, we consider stochastic epidemic models without network structure, which we refer to as stochastic population models.
Consider a population of  individuals. Remind that the rate of infected individuals infecting someone else is denoted by . Each infected individual return to be susceptible at rate . Assume that individuals encounter each other uniformly at random from the whole population. Let () be the number of infected individuals at time . Then { ()} 0 is a Markov jump process with state space N, with transition rates (1 - /) from state  to state  + 1, and  from state  to state  - 1. The transition probability hence is given as

 P( ( + ) =  + 1|  () = ) = ( - ) + (),


P( ( + ) =  - 1| () = ) =  + (),

(6)

 P( ( + ) = | () = ) = 1 -  ( - ) +  + ().


The stochastic population model (6) does not consider any network structure

and assumes that each individual encounter each other uniformly. It is easy to

see that the stochastic population model (6) is a Markov jump process with

an absorbing state  = 0, i.e., the state where no individual is infected. When

the process enters the absorbing state, the infection dies out. Most studies

of stochastic population models focus on analyzing under what conditions or

when the infection will die out.

Another important part in the studies of stochastic epidemic models dwells

in determining what deterministic model the stochastic model converges to,

when the population becomes large. Indeed, as  goes to infinity, the trajectory

   ()/ converges to the solution  () of the Kermack and McKendrick

deterministic model (1), i.e., lim sup0  | ()/ -  ()| = 0 almost surely. The proof of the convergence is underpinned by the well-known Kurtz's theo-

rem. One can refer to Section 5.3 of [24] for more details.

We now introduce the stochastic network models that incorporate network

structures. Define  () as the epidemic state of individual : it is infected if

 (), and healthy (susceptible) if  () = 0. Infected individuals recover at

rate , while susceptible individuals become infected at rate 

  =1





,

i.e.,

the product of the the infection rate and the number of infected neighbors.

Let ¯() = (1 (), . . . ,  ()) be the entire epidemic state of the whole pop-

ulation. The SIS stochastic network model can be expressed by the Markov

process:

P( ( + ) = 0|  () = 1, ¯()) =  + (),



P( (

+ )

=

1|

 ()

=

0, ¯())

=

      ()

+

 ( ) ,

(7)

 =1

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

for  = 1, 2, · · · , . The stochastic network model (7) has 2 states among which there is a absorbing state (a state where no individual is infected) reachable from any state ¯() with non-zero probability. Hence, this model indicates that the epidemic will die out almost surely in finite time. A more meaningful way to describe the spreading process is through probabilistic quantities. Indeed, the probability that the epidemic will not die out at time  is bounded as follows [24]



P(¯()  0)  exp (( ( ) - ))

   (0),

(8)

=1

where  is the adjacency matrix of the underlying network,  ( ) is its

spectral radius. From (8), how fast the epidemic will die out depends on the

effective spreading rate  / and the spectral radius of the underlying net-

work. Let  denote the time to absorption state (the time when the epidemic

dies out). An application of (8) leads to the results regarding the expected ex-

tinction of the epidemic [24]: Given arbitrary initial condition ¯(0)  {0, 1} ,

if  < 1/( ( )),

log  + 1

E [ ]





-

.  ( )

(9)

If   1/( ( )), the expected extinction time increases exponentially as the number of individuals  increases, i.e., E[] =  (), where  depends on the effective spreading rate  and the network structure [34]. Loosely speaking, the spectral radius  ( ) quantifies "how tightly the underlying network is connected". The results (8) and (9) aligns out intuition that it is easier for an infectious disease to grow on a more tightly connected network. Letting  goes to zero, the dynamics of E[ ()] can be written as


 E[ ()] = E (1 -  ())      () - E[ ()],  = 1, 2, · · · , . (10)
 =1

Alleviating the complication of the term E[ ()   ()] by assuming E[ ()   ()] = E[ ()]E[  ()] for all   , one can recover from (10) the N-intertwined deterministic model (4), which re-state below:


  = [1 -  ()]      () -   (),  = 1, 2, · · · ,  .
 =1
Since  ()  {0, 1},  () E[ ()] = P( () = 1) represents the probability that individual  is infected at time . Since E[ ()   ()] = E[ ()]E[  ()] is not necessarily true, the N-intertwined deterministic model (4) serves as an approximation of the stochastic network model (7). Indeed, it is shown that the expected values  in (4) are upper bounds on the actual probabilities given by (7) [17, 75, 79, 105]. Furthermore, [104] investigates how accurate the deterministic approximations (4) are in describing the stochastic model (7).

12

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

So far, we have introduced main stochastic and deterministic epidemic models that are well studied in the literature. To offer an overview of these models and their connection, in Fig. 2, we present an illustrative taxonomy of the epidemic models we introduced so far. Apart from models that are based on Markov processes and ODEs, there are also epidemic models that are built upon stochastic differential equations [4,38], purely data-driven [21], and based on spatial modeling [54, 88, 92, 103]. With a basic understanding of the epidemic spreading processes and their stochastic and deterministic modeling, next section dedicates to introduce how decisions can be made based on these models and how decision making will in turn affect the spreading processes.

2.2 Decision Models
The epidemic models introduced in the previous subsection does not involve any decision making and only describe the spreading process when there is no human intervention. But in reality, human will take immediate and drastic responses depending on the severity of the infection. Human intervention creates an ineligible impact on the spreading processes. Hence, when it comes to modelling of infectious diseases, it is necessary to take human intervention into consideration. Even though the above mentioned epidemic models consider spreading processes without any intervention/adaptation, they pave the way for the study of strategic decision making during an epidemic. To better understand epidemic spreading processes in human population, we introduce a holistic framework that incorporates epidemic models and decision models, which is illustrated in Fig. 2.
2.2.1 What Interventions to Take?
Decision models in epidemic spreading mainly include two types of decision makers: a central planner [7, 8, 20, 22, 23, 45, 48, 57, 63, 64, 67, 68, 72, 75, 76, 80, 84, 85, 89, 96, 106, 109­112, 114, 116, 118], which works for social benefits by conducting mechanism design and/or applying enforceable measures directly to the general public, and a collection of selfish and selfless individuals [2, 8, 11, 16, 22, 25, 30, 31, 41, 47, 50, 56, 57, 90, 100­102, 115] who work toward their own goals. Decisions makers can take either non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) or pharmaceutical interventions or both. For a central planner, non-pharmaceutical interventions include but not limit to requiring mandatory social distancing, enforcing lockdown, quarantining infected individuals, and deploying protective resources such as masks, gloves, gowns, and testing kits. Pharmaceutical interventions are related with the availability of vaccines or antidotes. A central planner's decision may involve vaccine distribution, antidote allocation, and treatment prioritization etc. For individuals, possible non-pharmaceutical interventions are wearing a mask, practicing social distancing, and self-quarantine etc. Pharmaceutical interventions such as getting

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

13

vaccinated, seeking for treatment, securing an antidote, and etc. are usually adopted by individuals to fight the epidemic.

2.2.2 How are Interventions Modelled?
To understand the coupling between the decision models and the epidemic models, it is important to figure out how non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical interventions can be modelled and incorporated into the epidemic models. Generally, non-pharmaceutical interventions help curb the spreading by either reducing the interaction between individuals (e.g., avoiding crowds, social distancing, lockdown, and quarantine) or utilizing protective resources (e.g., wearing a mask, frequent use of hand sanitizer etc.)
In networked epidemic models such as the N-intertwined deterministic model (4) and the stochastic network model (7), the interaction between individuals is usually captured by network topology. In an unweighted network, the adjacency element   = 1 means that there exists interaction between individual  and individual . Otherwise,   = 0. Some existing works use the adjacency element    {0, 1} to describe strict measures that completely cut down the interaction between individuals such as lock down and quarantine [26, 109, 112]. For example, if individual  is quarantined, then   = 0 for all   N . To capture the effect of soft measures such as social distancing, some works consider weighted networks to describe the intensity of interactions [57, 85]. For example, [57] uses a weight coefficient    [0, 1] to describe the intensity of the interaction between individual  and . In epidemic models that do not capture the complete topology such as the Kermack and McKendrick model (1), the Kerphart and White model (2), the model of Pastor-Satorras et al. (3), and the stochastic population model (6), the reduced interaction between individuals is modelled by a scaled infection rate , where   [0, 1] is the scaling factor and  is the normal infection rate when there is no intervention [7, 22, 64, 80, 84, 90]. For example, in [64],  captures how well people practice social distancing, e.g., the better people practice social distancing, the smaller the factor  is. An alternative way of modeling interventions such as lock down and quarantine is to create a new compartment [27, 67, 114]. In [67], the central planner decides the number of infected individuals to be quarantined to curb the spreading. The authors introduce a new compartment called `Quarantine' to model infected individuals being selected for quarantine. Once individuals are quarantined, they will not infect any susceptible individuals and will re-enter the Susceptible compartment once recovery.
Utilizing protective resources such as wearing a mask and using hand sanitizer helps individuals protect themselves from infection without reducing their interaction with other individuals. Such interventions are also captured by a scaled infection rate  [75, 76] with   [0, 1], which describes the fact that when contacting with infected individuals while wearing a mask, susceptible individuals will less likely to be infected.

14

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Pharmaceutical interventions can be adopted when vaccine, antidote, or effective treatment methods are available. Many works have studied the effect of vaccination on the spreading process [2,6,11,40,50,68,71,89,101], which can be modelled in several ways. One way is to reduces the infection rate between an infectious and a vaccinated individual to  <  while those who are not vaccinated suffer a higher infection rate  [2, 6, 11, 50, 68, 89]. How small vac is depends on the efficacy of the vaccine distributed. Another way to create a new compartment called `Vaccinated' and the rate at which individuals exit this compartment captures the protection duration of the vaccines [1,71]. The use of antidotes and the deployment of mass treatment accelerate the recovery process. As a result, The use of antidotes and the deployment of mass treatment are usually modelled by a recovery rate ¯ larger than the natural recovery rate  [20].

2.2.3 When are Interventions Taken?
Time plays a significant role in the coupling between the epidemic spreading processes and the decision models. Depending on when decisions are made, decision making can be categories into pre-epidemic decision making [15, 42, 44, 48,75,89,97,102], during-epidemic decision making [2,3,11,16,20,22,23,25,26, 29, 45­47, 50, 57, 63, 67, 68, 70, 72, 75, 84, 85, 90, 95, 96, 100, 101, 109, 112, 115], and post-epidemic decision making [14, 57, 83, 112]. Pre-epidemic decision making refers to the decisions made before an epidemic happens or at the beginning of the pandemic. Most works focus on network design/formation problems in which a virus resistant network with guaranteed performance is designed/formed [15,48,75,102]. Some works study the optimal design of an epidemic surveillance system on complex networks that helps detect an epidemic at an early stage [42,44,97]. Early epidemic detection allows a central planner to kill the spreading at its infancy. Post-epidemic decision making happens at the very end of an epidemic or after an epidemic dies out. The post-epidemic decision making addresses problems such as how to safely lift restrictions, how to reverse the interventions taken during the epidemic season [14, 57, 83, 112].
This review focuses on during-epidemic decision making problems where decisions are made while an epidemic is present. The dynamics of the epidemic spreading processes and the dynamics of the decision adaptation may evolve at different time-scales. Some interventions such as getting vaccinated (if one obtains life-long protection from the vaccine), taking an antidote, and distributing curing resources are irreversible [11, 47, 50, 72, 101]. For such interventions, decisions were only made once. In other works, authors assume that decisions are made once and for all and remain fixed over the spreading process or that decisions are made at a much smaller frequency than the epidemic spreading process [20, 84, 95]. These assumptions and the irreversibility of some interventions make it possible to formulate a static optimization [20,72] or game [11, 47, 50, 84, 95, 101] problem to study the decision making during the epidemic spreading. The objective functions of these static optimization or game problems only involve the limiting behavior of the epidemic models (1)-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

15

(7), e.g., the infection level at equilibria (when the epidemic model reaches a steady state) [11, 20, 95, 101], whehter the threshold condition is met (whether the epidemic will eventually die out) [75].
If the epidemic spreading processes and the decision models evolve at the same time-scale, adaptive strategies are employed in which the decisions are adapted at the same pace as the epidemic propagates. For example, a central planner distributes testing kits on a daily basis based on the daily infection data. This creates a real-time feedback loop in the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework shown in Fig. 1. In this case, individuals take interventions such as whether to wear a mask, conduct social distancing, or stay self-quarantined based on currently perceived information; the central planner adapts his/her interventions according to the observed infection status of the whole population in real-time. The strategies of individuals and the central planner is represented by a map that maps the information they received so far to an action that describes the interventions being taken. Depending on the choice of epidemic models, researchers employ different tools to study the humanin-the-loop epidemic framework depicted in Fig. 1. When deterministic models are employed to describe the epidemic spreading processes, optimal control [22, 23, 45, 67, 75, 109], differential game [22, 57, 63, 90, 96], or evolutionary game theory [100] have been applied to study the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework. When stochastic models are used, the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework is often time modelled by Markov decision processes [35, 85, 113] and stochastic games [3,25,26,46]. Some research works consider seasonal epidemic and at each epidemic season, decisions are made once. People adapts their decisions based on the payoff of the prior seasonal epidemic. This type of decision making problem under seasonal epidemic is solved by analyzing repeated games [16, 70] or evolutionary games [70].

2.2.4 Who are the Decision Makers?
For the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework, decision makers usually involve a central planner that represents the central authority and individuals that represent the general public [57]. The central planner can be an effective central government when fighting against an epidemic, or a network operator whose users are obliged to abide by the company security policy. An individual can be a individual citizen of a society [105], a local community [28], or a user in a computer network [118].
A central planner cares about the welfare of the whole population such as the number of infected individuals in the entire population, the well-being of the economy [7, 8, 20, 22, 23, 45, 48, 57, 63, 64, 67, 68, 72, 75, 76, 80, 84, 85, 89, 96, 106, 109­112, 114, 116, 118]. Individuals care more about their own interests, which include his/her own infection risk, the inconvenience of wearing a mask, and the monetary cost of getting a effective treatment [2,8,11,16,22,25,30,31, 41, 47, 50, 56, 57, 90, 100­102, 115]. Due to the selfishness of the individuals, the goal of an individual is not well aligned and sometimes is conflicting with the goal of a central planner [26, 57]. For example, the infected individuals, with

16

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

no infection risk any more, might be reluctant to take preemptive measures to avoid spreading the disease [26]. It is shown that there will be an increase in the number of infected individuals if individuals optimize for their own benefits instead of complying with the rules applied by the central planner [57]. Indeed, enforcing a strict protocol can be costly and sometimes impossible for the central planner. As a result, central authorities should have ask themselves whether they can offer the public enough incentives that are acceptable from the individual perspective and sufficiently strong to successfully combat the epidemic. An recent example is that, to reach herd immunity, Ohio state of the United states will give 5 people 1 million each in COVID-19 vaccine lottery to combat the hesitancy of getting a COVID-19 vaccine [39]. Hence, instead of of solving an optimization problem or a game problem directly, some works look into the mechanism design problem or the information design problem [117], on behalf of the central planner, that incorporates both the global state of the whole population and the individual's choice into designing an incentives to combat the epidemic [8, 16, 29, 57, 68, 77, 84].

2.2.5 Information Matters
Decision makers rely on what information they have to make decisions. The information available to decision makers at the time when decision is made plays a crucial role in the human-in-the-loop epidemic framework [23]. For example, severity of COVID-19 infection, perception of government responses, media coverage, acceptance of COVID-19-related conspiracy theories lead to a change of people's attitude about wearing masks during COVID-19 [93]. Many works assume that perfect information, including the health status of every individual and a complete knowledge of the network topology, is available to decision makers at all times [2, 22, 25, 26, 29, 50, 67, 75, 96]. However, in any epidemic, acquiring perfect, accurate, and timely information regarding the spreading process is arduous if not impossible [13]. For example, obtaining an estimate of the number of infected individuals requires testing at scale, which can be challenging to implement in rural areas [73]. Also, testing results can be delayed due to high testing demand and long sample analysis time. Many works study the decision making based on an estimated disease prevalence from available data [46,85,109] and the effect of delayed information in decision making [119].
Individuals can receive information from mass media (global broadcasters) such as TV, radio, newspaper, and official accounts on social media and/or from local contacts such as friends, family members, and connections on social media. During an epidemic, individuals may receive two levels of information: one is statistical information that describes the overall prevalence of the epidemic such the number of positive cases, the number of hospitalized patients, and the death toll; the other is local information such as whether people with close connections are infected or not, risk level in one's neighborhood [37, 65]. [33, 37, 108] investigate how word-of-mouth type of information spreading affect individuals' behavior and hence, alter the spreading processes.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

17

Individuals may suffer from inaccurate information from unreliable resources. An example would be information obtained from social media or by word of mouth in a spatially or culturally isolated community or neighbourhood. The perceived information of an individual may not necessarily reflect the actual prevalence of the infectious disease. Such incomplete or biased information about the epidemic together with strong prior beliefs may impede individuals from taking rational and reasonable response to protect themselves and others [90]. Information released by central authorities also play a big role in individuals' decision making. Responsible central authorities should therefore not only fight against the epidemic-related misinformation but also conduct information design to curb epidemic spreading and even panic spreading.

3 Game-Theoretic Decision Making in Epidemics
Game theory, in a nutshell, is a powerful mathematical tool of modeling how people make strategic decisions within a group [10, 32]. In the last decade, there has been a surge in research works in game-theoretic decision making amid an epidemic [2, 5, 8, 11, 13, 16, 18, 22, 25, 26, 29, 41, 46­48, 50, 56­58, 63, 65, 68, 70, 77, 84, 90, 91, 95, 96, 100­102, 111, 115, 116]. The reason behind the surge is three-fold.
First, centralized decision making becomes less practical for large-scale networked systems such as human contact network and most computer networks. Computing centralized protection strategies face scalability challenges when applied to very large networks [47, 72, 112]. Also it requires certain level of information granularity for a central authority to make satisfactory centralized decisions for most individuals. To attain information with certain granularity, the central authority has to gather a huge amount of local information, which is not just challenging to implement but also creates privacy issues and management difficulties. Hence, decentralized decision making becomes more reliable and practical in which local entities decide their own protection strategies with some high level guidelines provided by the central authority. Second, even when centralized decisions are made by a central authority, individuals living in the midst of the epidemic might not be willing to comply with the suggested protocols [8,11]. This is because, as we explain in Section 2.2.4, there is a misalignment of individual interests that individuals care more about and societal interests that the central authority is concerned about. There also exists a misalignment of interests between individuals and one's interest may depend on others' choices. That means each individual has choices, but the payoff for each choice depends on choices made by others. This act of selfishness makes it more appealing to model human responses using game-theoretic tools. Third, game theory, as a mature and broad field, provides a plethora of interesting concepts and analytical techniques that can model and explain human decision making amid an epidemic. For example, the self-interest strategy maximizing individual payoff is called the Nash equilibrium in game theory [10]; A central

18

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

authority can leverage Stackelberg game to design incentives for the public individuals to combat the epidemic [8]; many infectious disease models usually fail to appreciate the flux of human behavior, treating it instead as a constant. However, human behavior adapts as the epidemic spreading evolves and as the information disseminates. Dynamic game theory, which has been applied in many dynamic settings such as management science [9], labor economics [69], and cyber security [52], delivers a powerful paradigm to capture this flux and the incentives behind the change of behavior amid an epidemic [11]. We start the introduction of game theoretic models in epidemics by presenting a taxonomy in the next section.

3.1 A Multi-Dimensional Taxonomy of Game-Theoretic Models in Epidemics

The synthesis of game-theoretic models and epidemic models roots in the coupling between decision models and epidemic models, which we introduce in Section 2.2. The choice of game-theoretic models depends on multiple factors such as who the decision makers are, what interventions decision makers can take and when, what information decision makers know and etc. Existing literature mainly consider the following four types of games: static games [48­50, 56, 77, 84, 95, 101, 102, 111], discrete-time stochastic games [25, 26, 65], differential games [8, 22, 56, 57, 63, 90, 96], repeated games [2, 16, 51, 68], and evolutionary games [5, 41, 87, 91, 115].
In static game frameworks, researchers incorporate the epidemic models by only considering the limiting behavior of these models [48, 50, 77, 95, 101, 102, 111]. Here, we use [77] as an example. In [77], J. omic et al. captures the risk of infection using the limiting behavior of the heterogeneous -intertwined deterministic model (5). Let  be the steady state of model (5) for each individual   N . Letting  = 0, one obtains

 = 



=1    

,

  =1









+



for   N .

(11)

In [77], each individual decides its own recovery rate by seeking for treatment, having antidotes to optimize the trade-off between the overhead invested in recovery  and the penalty of infection . [77] creates a game with  players whose goals are to minimize  (, -) =  + . The coupling between individuals' strategies is captured by the limiting behavior of the epidemic model (11). Static game frameworks mostly consider once-and-forall interventions which can not be revoked and care about the limiting results such as the infection risk at steady state, or whether the disease will die out eventually.
Discrete-time stochastic games and differential game frameworks are introduced to capture the transient behavior of the epidemic process and to model adaptive interventions. The difference between Markov game frameworks and differential game frameworks lies in the choice of epidemic models. Discretetime stochastic game frameworks are built upon stochastic epidemic models

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

19

such as the stochastic population model (6) and the stochastic network model (7) [25, 26, 65]. Differential game frameworks rely on deterministic epidemic models or stochastic epidemic models that use stochastic differential equations to describe the dynamics of the spreading processes [8, 22, 56, 57, 63, 90, 96]. Characterizing a Nash equilibrium over the whole horizon is prohibitive for discrete-time stochastic games when the number of individuals increases or the number of stages becomes large. Even structural results are difficult to obtain. Hence, in [25, 26], the authors introduce a concept called myopic Markov perfect equilibrium (MMPE). The solution concept MMPE implies the assumption that individuals maximize their current utility given the state of the disease ignoring their future risks of infection and/or future costs of taking interventions in their current decision-making. This is a reasonable assumption considering the computational complexity of accounting for future states of the disease during an epidemic. [65] also adopts a similar solution concept where only the current state and the next state of one's infection are considered. For differential game frameworks, the equilibrium can be calculated using the general methods of Isaacs [59]. Using Pontryagin's maximum principl, [90] studied the differential game of social distancing and the spreading of an epidemic under the equilibrium; Khouzani et al. [63] found the optimal way of dissemination security patches in wireless networks to combat the spread of malware controlled by an adversary; Huang et al. [57] characterized the optimal way of reducing connectivity to keep the balance between mitigating the virus and maintaining the economy.
Repeated game frameworks are used to model seasonal epidemics which appear periodically [16, 68]. Interventions will be taken repeatedly at each epidemic season. For example, to protect oneself from influenza, one needs to get a flu vaccine each flu season due to the mutation of the virus or the protection time of a vaccine. Individuals adapts his/her behavior based on the cost/payoff incurred last season. Different from differential games and discretetime stochastic game frameworks, repeated game frameworks do not include the transient behavior the spreading process [2, 51].
One common way of individuals making `best-response' decisions that give the best immediate or long-term payoff. This way of decision making is adopted by differential game, stochastic game and repeated game frameworks. Another is the use of `imitation' dynamics where individuals copy the behavior that is previously or currently most successful [91]. The `imitation' dynamics governing the time evolution of the fractions of strategies in the population is similar to the replicator dynamics of evolutionary game theory [87]. Evolutionary game theory has been adopted to model the human behavior of imitating other individuals' successful strategy by many previous works [5, 41, 87, 91, 115]. In evolutionary game framework for epidemic modelling, the strategy dynamics is coupled with the epidemic dynamics [41, 91, 115]. The focus of evolutionary game frameworks is on the analysis of the coupled dynamics and the interpretation of the behavior of these dynamics [5]. A detailed review on this branch of research can be found in [18].

20

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Based on the interventions individuals adopt, game-theoretic models in epidemics can be categorized into vaccination game [2, 16, 50, 68, 95, 115], social distancing game [8,22,56,57,65,84,90], quarantine game [5,46], and mask wearing game [84] etc. There are also works that study the adoption of preemptive interventions [25, 26, 115] and interventions that changes the recovery rate [49, 111]. Beyond human social networks, many works studied interventions that can curb the malware or virus spreading in computer networks or wireless communication networks [41,51,56,57,63,77, 96, 101, 102], such as network re-forming [101, 102], installing security patches [41, 96], reducing the communication rate [57, 63] and etc.
If all individuals practice socially distancing, wear masks, stick to stay-athome orders, the risk of infection and the infection level of the whole population will be reduced significantly. However, there always exist trade-offs and temptations to defect from the regimen. Hand-washing is tedious, wearing mask is uncomfortable or annoying, socializing is necessary. When it comes to getting a vaccine, people express concerns about safety and side effects. One commonality of most effective interventions usually exhibit the characteristics that if one takes the intervention, he/her needs to pay for all the cost or inconvenience but everyone else in the population will more or less benefit from his/her behavior. This characteristics creates the coupling between individuals. For example, one can enjoy empty streets and markets without having a higher risk of infection if most people stay at home. Those who choose not to get a vaccine effectively reap the benefits of reduced virus transmission contributed by the people who do opt for vaccination. This behavior is referred to as `free-riding' behavior [58]. When a significant number of free rides appear, there will be a collective threat to containing the virus.
Different interventions induces different costs and provide benefits in different ways. For example, wearing mask produces immediate protection and is irreversible, hence induces instantaneous cost and benefit. Vaccination creates longer protection yet induces an immediate costs such as making a payment for the vaccine and experiencing side effects. Hence, different models were used to model different interventions. Vaccination games are usually modelled by static games or repeated games due to the irreversible of getting a vaccine [2, 16, 50, 95]. Revocable interventions such as quarantine, social distancing, wearing a mask are usually modelled by differential games or stochastic games [8, 22, 57, 65, 90].
Another criteria to classify the literature is to consider the players of the game. Most game-theoretic models in epidemics investigate the interplay between individuals [2, 11, 13, 16, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 41, 46, 47, 50, 57, 58, 65, 68, 70, 90, 91, 95, 101, 102, 115]. Individuals can be completely selfish who maximize their own payoff via optimizing their own payoff or imitating the most successful individuals [2, 11, 13, 16, 18, 22, 41, 46, 47, 50, 58, 65, 70, 90, 91, 115]. Some works incorporate the effect of altruism into their game-theoretic models in which individuals are not completely selfish and care about the well-being of their neighbors [19, 25, 26]. It is shown by Eksin et al. [26] a little empathy can significantly decreases the infection level of the whole population. The results

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

21

in [19] by Chapman et al. show that the central planner should promote vaccination as an act of altruism, thereby boosting vaccine uptake beyond the Nash equilibrium and serving the common good. Many works examine the inefficiency of selfish acts of individuals and the inefficiency is quantified by the price of anarchy [2, 57, 68, 95, 101, 102]. Results from these works demonstrate that individuals' selfishness becomes a big hurdle to fight against infectious diseases. Hence, some works introduce the role of central authorities and study how central authorities should create incentives/penalties achieve social optimum [8, 29, 84]. Another strain of research focus on the interplay between a central authority and an adversary [63, 96, 111, 116]. The adversary aims to maximize the overall damage inflicted by the malware and the central authority tries to find the best counter-measure policy to oppose the spread of the infection. The conflicting goals between the players are usually captured by a zero-sum dynamic game.

3.2 A Fine-Grained Dynamic Game Framework for Human-in-the-Loop Epidemic Modelling

In existing literature, there is no consensus on which game-theoretic framework to study human-in-the-loop epidemics. The integration between game theoretic models and epidemic models is done on a case-by-case basis depending on the players involved, what interventions people take(see Section 2.2.1), when interventions are taken (see Section 2.2.3), what epidemic models modelers choose (see Section 2.1), and the underlying network structure. Here, we present a fine-grained dynamic game framework to describe the essence of epidemic modelling when there is human in the loop.
We consider the following discrete-time Markov game with  players.

· Players: We consider a population of  individuals denoted by N and a

central authority.

· The individual state space: Each individual has a state from the finite

set S. The state indicates the health status of an individual. Elements in

S may include susceptible state, infected state, recovered state, and/or

quarantined state etc., depending on the compartment model being used

and how interventions are modelled. The state of individual  at time 

is denoted by  () = {1, 2, · · · , |S|}. For example, if we consider an 

model where individuals decide whether to get vaccinated, the state space

S contains three elements {1, 2, 3}, with  () = 1 ( () = 2,  () = 3)

meaning individual  is susceptible (infected, vaccinated respectively).

One can also introduce the concept of type in game theory into the human-

in-the-loop framework to capture different social, political and other de-

mographic groups.

· The population profile: The global detailed description of the population's

health status at time  is ¯() = (1 (), . . . ,  ())  S . The population

profile is denoted by  () = (1 (), 2 (), . . . , |S | ()) , where  () =

(1/ )

1 
=1

 ()= ,

indicating

the

proportion

of

individuals

in

state

.

A

22

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

central authority cares about the well-being of the whole population, hence
pays attention only to the population profile  (),   S. · The individual action space: Let A denote a set of possible actions indi-
viduals can take to combat the virus when his/her state is . Depend-
ing on which intervention is studied (see Section 2.2.2), A can be ei-
ther finite or continuum. At every time , an individual chooses an ac-
tion  ()  A. The action profile of the whole population is denoted by ¯() = ( 1 (), . . . ,  ()) . The action set can be state-dependent if necessary. · The transition kernel : The epidemic process (¯()) N is a Markov Process once the sequence of actions taken by individuals is fixed. Let  be the
transition kernel, namely  is a mapping S × S × A   [0, 1]. Given the population infection profile ¯() at time , if individuals take their
actions (  ())N, then at time  + 1, the global detailed description of the population's health status follows the distribution:

P(¯( + 1) = (1, . . . ,  ) |¯() = (1, . . . ,  ) , ¯() = (1, . . . ,  )) = (1, . . . ,  , 1, . . . ,  , 1, . . . ,  ).

The transition kernel is decided by the epidemic models (see Section 2.1.3) and the interventions the actions represent (see Section 2.2.2). For example, the transition kernel can be constructed using the SIS networked stochastic model (7) or other epidemic models. For example, if the actions of individual  include   {0, 1} with  = 0 representing individual  is self-quarantined and  = 1 representing individual  staying normal, then the transition kernel can be constructed by

P( ( + 1) = 0|  () = 1, ¯(),  () = ) =  + (),



P( (

+ 1)

=

1|

 ()

=

0,

¯ ( ) ,

 ()

=

)

=



     ()

+ (),

 =1

(12)

for   N . As we can see if all individuals brace for the epidemic by quar-

antining, i.e.,  () = 0 for all   N for some   [1, 2], the spreading

will slow down at a fast rate decided by . Not every individual has the

inventive to do so.

· Costs: The costs come from two sources: one is from the risk of catching

the virus, another is from the interventions being taken. Most interven-

tions/measures come with either monetary costs or inconvenience. Hand-

washing is tedious, wearing mask is uncomfortable or annoying, socializing

is necessary. The instant cost at time  for individual  hence depends

on his/her health status (state), the interventions he/she takes (action),

and/or the states of other individuals. Formally,

 ()

=





(



(),

 ())

+





( N ,

N )

+




(

¯

(),



¯()),

in which there exits three levels of altruism. The cost function  captures

the selfishness of individual , where the superscript  means selfishness.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

23

If

the

second

cost

function




is added, it means individual  care about



his/her neighbors (fiends, family members). The superscript  of   means


friends or family. The highest level of altruism is captured by  meaning


individual  cares about every individual in the population. For a com-

pletely

selfish

individual




(·, ·)



0

and

 (·, ·)



0.

Modellers

can

also





make

,




,

and



time

dependent

if

necessary.





· Information and Strategies: The information set of individual  at time

 is denoted by I (). Individual may not every detail about the whole

population. He/she may only know his own health status and the popu-

lation profile broadcasted by the central authority, i.e., I () = { (0), . . . ,

 (),  (0), . . . ,  ()}. Or individual  may only know information about

his neighboring individuals, which gives I () = {N (0), . . . , N ()}. Individuals make decisions based off of the information available to them. The

rules individuals follow to make decisions is called strategies. The strategy

of individual , , is a map from the information space and the time space

to his/her action space, meaning that the action of individual  is chosen

as  () =  (I (), ).

Remark 1 When there is a presence of a central authority, the central authority

cares about the population profile instead of the health status of a particular

individual. For example, the goals of the central authority might be to sup-

press the proportion of infected individuals, to reduce the death toll on the

general public, and to boost up the uptake of vaccines. These metrics can all be

reflected in the population profile  () for  = 0, 1, 2, · · · . Hence, the cost func-

tion of the central authority can be a function of  (), i.e.,  () =  ( ()).

There are two paths the central authority can follow to achieve its goals. The

first

is

designing

a

penalty/reward

function





(



(

)

,

 ())

that

reward

(pun-

ish) individuals who comply to (violate) the suggested rules such as social

distancing, quarantine, or getting vaccinated. The second is through informa-

tion design such as promoting altruism, raising awareness, health education

etc.

The game between individuals unfolds over a finite or infinite sequence of stages, where the number of stages is called the horizon of the game. Infinite horizon game models epidemics that persist decades long [90]. Some papers consider finite horizon game where the terminal time is decided by when the vaccines are widely available [18, 57, 91]. The overall objective, for each individual, is to minimize the expected sum of costs he/she receives during the epidemic.
Solving such a fine-grained stochastic game is difficult, if not prohibitive, under general solution concepts. The difficulties emerge from three facts. The first is that as the number of individuals  increases, the size of the state space |S| for the global state ¯ increases exponentially. In human population, the number of individuals in a community ranges from thousands to millions. Hence, analyzing such an enormous number of individuals under the fine-grained dynamic game framework become impossible. The second is that

24

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

individuals do not know the exact information of the whole population ¯() for every . For some epidemics, it is difficult for individuals to know their own state due to the fact that some infectious diseases do not cause symptoms for some individuals or cause common symptoms that are shared with other diseases. Also to gather information regarding the population profile  () for each time  and broadcast it the individuals, the central authority needs to arrange large scale surveys, polls, and diagnostic tests on a daily or weekly basis. Even so, the population profile  () can only be estimated using gathered data. This partial information situation creates a partially observable stochastic game. It is intractable to compute Nash or other reasonable strategies for such partially observable stochastic games in most general cases [43]. The third is if the transition kernel is described by a networked stochastic epidemic model such as (12), the state dynamics of one individual is coupled directly or indirectly with every other individual through the underlying network. The fact makes it impossible to obtain an appropriate strategy by decoupling [26]. Hence, we propose this fine-grained stochastic game framework to describe the quintessences of the integration model into the epidemic spreading process, with no intention to solve it.
Existing literature usually proposes less fine-grained game-theoretic frameworks in order to obtain meaningful results that help understand the spreading of epidemics under human responses. These works generalize or simplify the fine-grained dynamic game mainly in three ways. One is to use mean-field techniques by assuming the transition probability of each individual's state only couples with the population profile  () and some indistinguishability assumptions [35, 66, 90, 98, 99]. The second is to study a simplified solution concept where each individual considers costs over only a limited number of stages [25, 26, 65]. The third is to consider a continuous -intertwined epidemic model (4), rather than a stochastic one, where a dynamic game is built upon [57] or to apply mean-field techniques in a homogeneous epidemic model such as the Kermack and McKendrick model (1) [90]. In the next subsection, we present three representative works that proposed simplified frameworks to deliver meaningful results by leveraging the above mentioned methods. These works choose totally different epidemic models and have their unique ways of integrating game-theoretic decision making into these epidemic models.

3.3 Social Distancing Game with Homogeneous SIR Epidemic Model [90]
In [90], T. Reluga studies the effect of social distancing on the spreading of SIR type of infectious diseases. The author uses a homogeneous deterministic epidemic model: the Kermack and McKendrick model (1). A differential game framework is proposed in which the interplay between individuals is simplified as the interaction between a specific individual and the aggregate behavior of other individuals.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

25

3.3.1 Modelling

How social distancing is modelled : Let  be one specific individual's strategy of daily investment in social distancing. The population strategy  is the aggregate daily investment in social distancing by the population. Borrowing the idea from mean-field game, in the limit of infinitely large populations, i.e.,   ,  and  are independent strategies because changes in one individual's behavior will have negligible effect on the average behavior. The effectiveness of investment in social distancing is captured by (), which is the infection rate given an aggregate investment in social distancing practices. Without loss of generality, we set (0) = 1 when there is no investment. To model the diminishing returns with increasing investment, the author assumes that () is convex and given by

1

() =

,

1 + 

with the maximum efficiency of social distancing  (0) = -. Epidemic Models: Epidemic usually start with one or a few infected cases,
so  (0)  0. The macroscopic behavior of the spreading process under the aggregate social distancing investment  can be captured by a normalized SIR version of the Kermack and McKendrick epidemic model:

 = -()

 = () - (),

(13)

 = (),

where the infection rate and the recovery rate are normalized in order to focus on the effect of social distancing practices on the spreading process.
The cost function: The total cost of the epidemic to the population, , includes the daily costs from infection , the daily costs of infection :



=

  -
0

(

+

)- 

-

 (  )- 1+

(14)

where - is a discount term with  being the discount rate and the last term is a salvage term representing the cumulative costs associated with individuals are sick at the time mass vaccination occurs (  ).
The evolution of individual states: The premise of the game is that at each point in the epidemic, individuals can choose to pay a cost associated with social distancing in exchange for a reduction in their risk of infection. Let p(t)  3 be the probabilities that an individual is in the susceptible, infected, or recovered state at time t. The probabilities p() evolve according to the Markov process

p = (; )p,

(15)

26

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

where  is the individual's daily investment in social distancing and the transition-

rate matrix

-() 0 0

(;

)

=

 

()

-1 0 .

 

0

1 0





The coupling between the population profile (, , ) and the individual profile

p(t) is described by the two processes (13) and (15). The individual risk of

infection depends on his/her investment in social distancing  and the infection

level of the whole population .

The values of states: Using the ideas of Isaacs [59], we calculate expected

present values of each state at each time, conditional on the investment in

social distancing. The expected present value is average value one expects af-

ter accounting for the probabilities of all future events, and discounting future

costs relative to immediate costs. Let V(; , ) = ( (; , ),  (; , ),  (; , ))

denote the expected present values with  (; , ),  (; , ), and  (; , )

representing the expected present values of being in the susceptible, infected,

or removed state at time  when using strategy  in a population using strategy

. The expected present values V eolves according to the adjoint equations

-V = ((; ) - )V + v,

where v (; ) = (-(), -1, 0) incorporates the individualized cost of (14) into the expected present values V(; , ). Since the dynamics of V is independent of , there is no need to consider recovered individuals further. Further simplifying the dynamics of V by taking  = 0 (not discount) and  = -1 (fixed expected value at infected state), one obtains

-  = -(1 + )() - ,

(16)

which evolves backward in time with boundary condition  (  ) = 0. If everyone else invest heavily in social distancing, the individual can become a free rider that earns the benefit (value) without having to invest too much in social distancing because the infection level  will remain low. To find a balanced social distancing strategy (Nash strategy), one can simply focuses on (13) and (16).

3.3.2 Analysis
To find a balanced strategy is to find the best strategy to play, given that all the other individuals are also attempting to do so. Given such context, a Nash equilibrium solution becomes an appropriate solution concept for the differential game formulated in Section 3.3.1.
Definition 1 Given the expected value  (; , ) in the susceptible state and the associated population level spreading dynamics (13),  is a Nash equilibrium if for any possible strategy ,  (0; , )   (0; , ).

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

27

A Nash equilibrium is a subgame perfect equilibrium if it is also a Nash equilibrium at every state the system may pass through. Indeed, the Nash equilibrium can be obtained by finding the investment that maximizes the rate of increase in the individual's expect value.

Lemma 1 If  (, ) is a subgame perfect equilibrium, then it satisfies the maximum principle




(

,

)

=

arg

max

-(1

+

 )  ( ) 

-

,

 0

when  =  everywhere

One can solve for  (, ), if () behaves well.

Theorem 1 If () is differentiable, decreasing, and strictly convex, then  is uniqely defined by the relations

 = 0 if -  (0) (1 + )  1, - () (1 + ) = 1, otherwise.

(17)

From Theorem 1, one knows that at the Nash equilibrium, whether an individual invests in social distancing depends on the maximum efficiency of social distancing (0) = , the current infection level of the population , and the expected value in susceptible state . When an individual does invest in social distancing, an individual tends to invest more if the efficiency of social distancing is higher, or the current infection level  is higher, or the value of the susceptible state  is greater.

3.3.3 Highlighted Results

It is interesting to see the instantaneous behavior  at one time point given the value of the expected value in susceptible state , the infection level  and the susceptible level . Such results can easily be computed by solving (17) and the results are shown in Figure 3.
The last few `survivors' tend to social distance more: Figure 3 shows the infection risk () in feedback form with implicit coordinates ( (, )) on the left and transformed explicit coordinates ( (, )) on the right. As we expect, the left figure shows that a larger value of the susceptible state () induces a greater instantaneous social distancing. From the right figure, one can see that as the number of susceptible individuals increases, the investment in social distancing decreases, hence individual's infection rate increases with less social distancing. One can also see that when only a small portion of the population remain susceptible, the biggest investments in social distancing happens. That means the last few 'survivors' tend to social distance to brace for the infection.
Two scenarios are investigated in [90]. The first is the infinite horizon differential game that gives the equilibrium behavior when there is never a vaccine and the epidemic spreads until its natural end. The second is the

28

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Fig. 3 [90] Contour plots of relative risk surface for equilibrium strategies with paprameter  = 10.
finite-horizon problem that studies the individual behavior in equilibrium when there will be a vaccine introduced at time   . For the infinite-horizon case, the epidemic spreading dynamics under the social distancing equilibrium and in the absence of social distancing is plotted in Figure 4.
Social distancing occurs later but ends sooner than the wide spreading of epidemics: As we can see from the top left figure in Figure 4, under equilibrium social distancing, social distancing is never used until part-way into the epidemic, and ceases before the epidemic fully dies out. That means at the beginning of the epidemic, individuals will not be alert to take any interventions until the epidemic prevails. And social distancing practices are going to be lifted before the epidemic completely ends when the situation gets better.
Social distancing leads to a smaller epidemic but prolongs the epidemic: When comparing the time series data on the top left figure and its counterpart on the bottom left figure of Figure 4, one can observe that social distancing reduces the scale of the epidemic and prolongs the prevalence of the epidemic. Even though social distancing prolongs the epidemic, practicing social distancing is still important since it helps `flatten the curve' and avoid a large number of individuals being infected in a short period of time.
Now let's shift the focus to the finite-horizon problem where vaccines are universally available at a given time   . As is shown in Figure In a equilibrium, social distancing will last until the very time when vaccines are universally available. When the wide availability of vaccine arrives sooner, social distancing begins sooner. When the vaccine becomes available at   = 8.6 (see the left plot in Figure 5), individuals save 50% of the cost of infection per capita by practicing social distancing. When the vaccine becomes available earlier, say when   = 6.5, 80% of the cost of infection can be saved per capita.
Social distancing enlarge the window of opportunity during which mass vaccine can reduce the cost of the epidemic: The earlier a vaccine becomes available, the less the whole society suffer. If a vaccine becomes available at

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

29

Fig. 4 [90] The spreading dynamics with equilibrium social distancing and without social distancing with parameters  (0) = 4.46,  = 10.
Fig. 5 [90] The spreading dynamics when universal vaccination occur after a fixed time with parameters  (0) = 3,  = 20,  (0) = 3 × 10-6.
the late stage of the epidemic when most individuals are recovered, the vaccine won't help much reduce the transmission. There exists a limited window during which large-scale vaccination can effectively cut down the cost of infection at the population level. Numerical results in [90] show that equilibrium social distancing can extend this limited window of opportunity. 3.3.4 Discussion The modelling in [90] unravels the complexity of the fine-grained dynamic framework from several aspects. The first is the use of a homogeneous SIR deterministic epidemic model: the Kermack­McKendrick SIR model, in which the epidemic process is described by two ordinary differential equations ( can be expressed as  = 1 -  - ). The effect of social distancing on the spreading process is captured by a scalar function () which is homogeneous to

30

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

all individuals. The spreading process enjoys a decreased the infection rate as the population invests more in social distancing. The use of such homogeneous epidemic model is a double-edged sword. On one hand, homogeneous epidemic models make analytical results more attainable, but on the other side, homogeneous epidemic models need the assumption that the population is homogeneous and strongly mixed. However, we know that the contact patterns among individuals are highly structured, with regular temporal, spatial, and social correlations. The second is the decoupling of the direct connection between individual's strategy  and the aggregate strategy of the population . This allows one's risk of infection to depend only on the infection level of the population , which implicitly depends on .
Realistically, mass vaccination cannot happen overnight as is assumed in the paper. Vaccination are usually rolled out continuously as it is proved to put into use. This effect can be included into the model by considering a timedependent forcing. In this game, the individual has the complete information about the epidemic including the expected value and the infection level of the whole population. However, in reality, the incomplete information (biased or inaccurate information) may drive human behavior away from the equilibria obtained in this paper.

3.4 The Power of Empathy: A Markov Game under the Myopic Equilibrium [26]
In [26], Eksin et al. proposes a Markov game framework using the contact network stochastic epidemic model [74, Ch. 17] in which healthy individuals utilize protective measures to avoid contracting a disease and sick individuals utilize preemptive measures out of empathy to avoid spreading a disease. A solution concept, called the myopic Markov perfect equilibrium (MMPE), is introduced to model the human behavior, which also makes theoretical results attainable for such framework. Eksin et al. show that there is a critical level of empathy by the sick individuals above which the infectious disease die out rapidly. Further, they show that empathy among sick individuals is more effective than risk-aversion from healthy individuals.
3.4.1 Modelling
The epidemic model : Eksin et al. considers a networked SIS stochastic epidemic model, which is a variant of the networked stochastic model (7). An individual  in the population N susceptible ( () = 0) or infected and infectious ( () = 1) at any given time  = 1, 2, · · · . A global detailed description of the population is denoted by ¯() = (1 (), · · · ,  ()) .
The transition kernel  can be specified by 01 () and 10 () for   N and  = 1, 2, 3, · · · . 01 () is the probability that individual  is susceptible at time

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

31

, but gets infected at time  + 1 and


01

(

)

P( ( + 1) = 1| () = 0) = 1 -

(1 -  ()  ()   ()), (18)

 N

where   (0, 1) is the infection rate, 0    0 is the action of individual , and the action of its neighboring individual  is 0     1 for   N.
How protective and preemptive measures are modelled: Each term 1 -  ()  ()   () is the probability that the individual  is not infected by neighbor . If either individual  or his/her neighbor  take protective and preemptive measures such as wearing masks, practice social distancing, or other measures, the probability that individual  is infected by neighbor  will decreases. An extreme case is either  = 0 or   = 0 under which individual  will never be infected by his/her neighbor . The product of all the terms
 N (1- ()  ()   ()) is the probability that the individual is not infected by any one of possible interactions. 10 () is the probability that individual  is infected at time  but recovered at time  + 1. This probability is equal to the inherent recovery rate of the disease   (0, 1), i.e.,


10

()

P( ( + 1) = 0| () = 1) = .

(19)

The payoff function: Individuals make their decisions based on the tradeoff between the risk of contracting the virus and the costs of taking protective and preemptive measures. Different from other works in which individuals are completely selfish [2,11,13,16,18,22,41,46,47,50,58,65,70,90,91,115], Eksin et al. considers a sense of altruism among individuals. Individuals are concerned not only about getting infected themselves but also about infecting others in their neighborhood. An individual's payoff at time  is a weighted linear combination of these considerations:

 (, N , N ())





= 

 0

- 1(1 -

 ())



   ()

+   ()



  (1 -

  ())

,

(20)







 N

 N







where 0, 1.2 are fixed weights. The first term inside the square bracket is the payoffs of not taking any measures including socialization benefits, convenience benefits, and economic benefits etc. The second term captures the risk aversion of susceptible individuals. The risk comes from contacting with infectious neighbors who fail to take serious measures to protect others. The third term is the empathy term that quantifies the risk of infecting others. Hence, the weights 0, 1, and 2 are referred to as socialization, risk averseness, and empathy constants.
The payoff function  is a bilinear function of  and   for   N . That means given the actions of individual 's neighbors N and their health status N (), to maximize his/her payoff, he/she needs to decide whether to resumes normal activity ( = 1) or self-isolates ( = 0) depending on the sign

32

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

of expression inside the square bracket. If the expression is positive, individual  prefers to resume normal. Otherwise, self-isolation is the best choice.
The payoffs of the neighbors of individual  depend on the actions of their own neighbors. This means if the underlying network G is connected, the payoff profile of the population couples the actions of all individuals. Hence, individuals need to reason about the interaction levels of their neighbors in their decision-making. Such individual reasoning can be modelled using game theory.

3.4.2 Analysis

Obtaining a analytical solution such as the Nash equilibrium is difficult if one considers accumulative payoffs over a finite period of time or an infinite horizon. Here, Eksin et al. considers a solution concept called the myopic Markov perfect equilibrium (MMPE).

Definition 2 The strategy of individual  at time , denoted by , is a map-

ping

from

the

state

¯ ( )

to

the

action

space

[0, 1],

i.e.,

()


=

 (¯()).

A

strategy profile  { }N is called a MMPE strategy profile if



(


,



N ,

N ())



 (,


N ,

N

()),

holds for any   [0, 1] and for all  = 1, 2, · · · ,   N under the Markov process described by (18) and (19).

The use of MMPE profile carries two implied assumptions. One is the assumption that individuals' actions depend only on the payoff relevant state of the disease. Whether the class of Markovian strategies contain the Nash strategy for all possible strategies is not discussed in [26]. Another is the assumption that individuals make decisions considering the current instantaneous payoff only. Under the assumption of myopic strategies, individuals do not foresee their future risks of infection or infecting others in their decision making.
The computation of the MMPE strategy profile involves only one stage of the payoff. So, it is more tractable than computing the Nash strategies that consider the accumulative payoffs with states evolving from time to time. Indeed, Eksin et al. shows that there exists at least one such strategy profile for the bilinear game captured by (20). The proof of existence is constructive, which also provides an algorithm that computes an MMPE strategy profile in finite time (Readers who are interested in the proof can refer to [26]). But unfortunately, even for such a simplified solution concept, no closed-form results in terms of expressing the MMPE action  as a function of the current

state ¯() is obtained. In the next part, we present several highlighted results obtained from simulations by the authors.

3.4.3 Highlighted Results:

A little empathy plays a huge role in bounding the basic reproduction number : An important measure for an epidemic process is the basic reproduction number 0, which measures the spread of an infectious disease from an initial sick

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

33

individual in an otherwise susceptible host population. Whether 0 > 1 or not is an indicator that the disease is likely to persist when there are relatively

low number of infected individuals. Hence, 0 is an important measure relating the likelihood of disease persistence to network and utility weights. When

individuals act according to an MMPE strategy profile, the following bound

holds for 0,



 

0 

(),



 =1

where () is the proportion of individuals who have degree  in the network,

and  min{ 1/2 , }. Here,  is the largest degree an individual has in

the network. When there is no protective and preemptive measures taken,

the bound

for

the network

is

0



 

  =1

().

If

the

empathy

constant

is

close

to

zero

such

that

2

is

smaller

than

1 

0,

one

recovers

the

bound

for

the contact network models with no protective or preemptive measures. When

individuals weigh the risk of infecting others and the costs of taking measures

equally, i.e., 0 = 2, the basic reproduction number 0 is well bounded, i.e.,

0



 (1).


In

a

scale-free

network

with

degree

distribution

()



 -2 ,

the

bound becomes

1

0





( + 1). 2

(21)

If the empathy weight 2 is negligible (2 < 0/), meaning individuals do not

care about infecting others, then the bound increases logarithmically with the

size

of the population, i.e.,

0



 

1 2

(



+

1).

Indeed,

the

bound is the exact

reproduction number for the contact network SIS model with no individual

behavior response to disease prevalence [74, Ch. 17]. The effect of individual

response on 0 appears as the empathy weight 2 increases. To guarantee

0 < 1, the central authority needs to promote altruism among individuals to

guarantee

0

2

>

exp(2/)

. -1

(22)

To show the accuracy of the critical 2 given by (22), Eksin et al. compares the 0 bound given by (21) to simulated 0 value in [26, Figure 4].
Risk aversion alone cannot eradicate the disease but it can affect the infec-

tion level : While the risk averseness weight 1 does not appear in any of the bounds for 0, 1 cab affect the infection level of the population under MMPE strategy even though the authors do not show how 1 is going to affect the infection level. The authors do show that when the empathy weight 2 is zero, the outbreak threshold condition stays the same, i.e.,  ( )/ > 1 for any
1  [0, 1]. This indicates that risk aversion alone cannot help eradicate the disease without the empathy of infectious individuals in this game.

3.4.4 Discussion

The game framework formulated here by Eksin et al. is similar to the finegrained framework introduced in Section 3.2. Eksin et al. made two simplifications to ensure the analysis and the numerical computation are feasible. One

34

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

is the use of MMPE as a solution concept to avoid resorting to dynamic programming techniques to solve the problem, which also facilitates the process of showing the existence of the equilibrium. Another is the assumption that every individual knows the complete state information ¯() at every stage .
Compared with [90] by T. Reluga, there are two differences in terms of the epidemic models. First, Eksin et al. utilize a networked model while T. Reluga chooses a shapeless epidemic model. Second, Eksin et al. select a stochastic model while T. Regula leverages a deterministic model. The networked epidemic model describes the heath status at an individual level. This framework allows Eksin et al. to model the local interactions: protecting oneself and protecting one's neighbors. However, the networked epidemic models always limit the number of individuals in the population  to a finite number. As  increases, even the computation of a simplified equilibrium concept such as the MMPE becomes intractable.
Eksin et al. focuses on investigating the effects of individual measures on diseases eradication through the lens of the basic reproduction number 0. Hence, the results here shed very little light on the effects of empathy and risk aversion on longer-term epidemic processes when the disease becomes endemic. Investing such individual measures on long-term spreading processes can be a future research direction. The authors do analyze the price of anarchy (PoA) under the MMPE and it is shown that the price of anarchy is bounded as

1



PoA



1

-

max N

|N |

max{1,

2} .

0

This upper bound can be arbitrarily bad, i.e., in the order of 1/. That means

without enforced measures from the central authority, individual's response

can be inefficient in term of maximizing the social benefit. Hence, it is inter-

esting to couple the decentralized individual responses to disease prevalence

with centralized policies such as public announcements, mass organized isola-

tion, or vaccination campaigns arranged by the central authorities.

3.5 Individual Weight Adaptation: An -Player Differential Game [57]
In [57], Huang et al. proposes an -player differential game framework based on the -intertwined deterministic epidemic model (5). The author mainly focus on mitigating virus spreading on computer networks. But the modelling, the analysis, and the results of [57] can shed some light on epidemic spreading in human population. In the differential game, each individual, who is completely selfish, try to strike a balance between being infected and loss of benefit (economic or social) by reducing his/her connection to neighbors. With a deterministic epidemic models, using Pontryagin's maximum principle, the authors are able to obtain structural results that help understand human behavior under an epidemic. The -intertwined epidemic model is networked, allowing the authors to capture the local interactions among individuals and their neighbors. The authors also propose a penalty scheme, on behalf of the central authority, to achieve social welfare for the population.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

35

3.5.1 Modelling

Modelling interventions through a weighted network with time-varying weights: A directed weighted network is a network where the directed connections among individuals have weights assigned to them. The weights between two individuals capture the intensity of the connectivity and the directions indicate the direction in which the disease or virus can spread. The weight between individual  and individual  at time  is denoted by   ()  [0, 1]. In a directed network,   () is not necessarily equal to   () for any . Individual  can reduce his/her risk of contracting the virus by cutting down   ,   N , i.e., its connectivity with his/her neighbors. In a computer network, this can be done by reducing file transmission from one server to another or downloading less packages from some servers.
The epidemic model : Huang et al. adopts the -intertwined SIS epidemic model, in which the probability of individual  being infected at time  is denoted by  (). The evolution of  is coupled with the states of other individuals in the network:



 = [1 -  ()]

  ()   () -   (),  = 1, 2, · · · , , (23)

 N


where

N 


denote

the

set

of

neighbors

individual



reaches

out

for.

If

  ()

is high, individual  can reach out less to individual  to avoid being infected,

i.e., reducing   (), and restoring its connection to individual  after   ()

decreases. The epidemic model (23) is a variant of the -intertwined deter-

ministic model (4) we introduced in Section 2.1.2 with two differences. One

is that here, huang et al. uses weights that can be adaptive to describe the

network instead of fixed adjacency matrix elements. Another is that the trans-

mission is now directional. Individual  being able to infect individual  does

not mean individual  can be infected by individual . Such cases appear more

in computer networks. In human population, the transmission is often times

mutual. Hence, it is more reasonable to use an undirected network to model

connections in human population.

The cost function: The authors consider completely selfish individuals asso-

ciating with two costs. One cost arises from infection captured by  : [0, 1]  R+. Another cost is from inefficiency or performance degradation induced by

deviating from the original connections   for ,   N , which is captured by a convex function   : R  R+. Individual  optimizes over a finite horizon
[0, ] with respect to its cost :





 ( ,  N , {  }  N ) =

 (  ()) +

  (  () -   ),





0

 N



(24)

where   is the original elements in the adjacency matrix. The original weights   , ,   N describe the connectivity before the epidemic hits. The original weights   , ,   N are assumed to be optimal for each individual meaning

36

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

everyone keeps the best way of connecting to others for themselves. Any devia-

tion from the original weights at time  will induce inefficiency or performance

degradation quantified by  N   (  () -   ). The first term inside the 
integral of (24) represents individual 's cost of infection. Different from the

work by Eksin et al. [26], the individuals here are completely selfish who only

care about their own infection and inefficiency or performance degradation.

However, the goal of the central authority is to minimize the aggregated social

cost





 

 =

 (  ()) +

  (  () -   ).

(25)

0 N

 N  N


The terminal time  is the time when mass installation of anti-virus or anti-

malware patch is implemented.

3.5.2 Analysis

The authors apply Pontryagin's minimum principle to obtain a Nash equilibrium for the -person differential game defined by (23) and (24). Under the Nash equilibrium strategy, individuals adapt their weights according to the following rule.

Theorem 2

The

Nash

equilibrium

strategy

profile

{



 

}



N

,





N

for

the

-

person differential game defined by (23) and (24) are adapted according to

0, 

- 








(-



),





()

=



(






)

(-



()),






(

-



)

<

-  ()

<

 (0),


(26)

   , 

-  ()



 (0),


for





N,





N  ,


where

  ()

 ()(1

-



 

(

))








(

)

.

Here,

 (·)

is

the

-th component of the costate function x (·) whose dynamics is governed by

x ()

=

 (,

{ ()}N,

{


()} N,  N )x ()

+

,

  N,

where  = -/ and  is a matrix defined as

  

 N









+

,

,

=

 -(1

-




())




()



,

if  = ,

if





N,


0,

otherwise.



One can observe from (26) that the weight adaptation  under Nash equi-



librium depends on   ()

 ()(1

-




()

)








()

.

That

means

the

weight

adaptation




is

decided

by

the

costate

component

,

which

carries

the

in-

formation about the whole population, individual 's health status , and

his/her neighbor's health status. To see the dependence more clearly, one can

assume

that

 

is

quadratic,

i.e.,

  ()

=

1 2

2.

Then,

0,

    ,







()

=

 -



(),

  >   () > 0,

(27)

   ,

  ()  0.



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

37

One can draw several intuitive conclusions immediately from (26) and (27).

The first is that individual  reach out less to his/her neighbor  if the neighbor

is infected with high probability, i.e.,  decreases when  () increases. The





second is that individuals tend to reach out less to neighbors who can get

infected

easily,

i.e.,

a

high



leads

to

a

lower

 .


The

weight

adaptation

 ()


is

continuous

over

time

if

 

is

convex.

If

 

is concave, individuals would implement bang-bang type of control:




()

=

0,



 ,

  ()



  (-  )
,
 

  ()

>

  (-  )
.
 

Different from the goals of individuals, the central authority aims to minimize
social costs  = N . Huang et al. show that if the central authority apply a penalty  () =  R   (  ) to individual  at each time , the central authority can achieve social social optimum without enforcing weight adaptation rules for every individual. Here, R is the set of individuals can be reached by
individual .

3.5.3 Results

Not just current health status matters, inherent vulnerability also matters:

From (26) and (27), we know that individuals cut down their connections

with individuals who are currently infected. Beyond that, individuals also

lower more weight of connections with individuals who are inherently more

vulnerable to the virus even though they may not be infected currently. For

example, in computer network, one may reduce data transfer from a server

whose security level is very low.

The `what-the-hell' mentality: The `what-the-heck' mentality is a mentality

that when something undesired happens, one give up making effort to fix it.

Similar mentality also appear in results given by (26) and (27). The term

(1 -  ()) in   suggests that if individual  is infected, he/she just restore all

his/her connections with his/her neighbors and have fun. Since the network

studied here by Huang et al. is directed, infected individuals restoring their

connections will not cause more infection. It is worth investigating whether this

result still holds or not in undirected networks. If it holds, this unempathetic

behavior may leads to a higher infection level in the population.

The weight reduction lasts until the last minute: The authors show that for

all   N ,  ()  0 for all   [0, ] with  () = 0 if and only  = . It is also shown that for every   N ,  > 0 for all   [0, ]. That means every

individual would more or less cut down his/her connections with neighbors

during the spreading process and only restore his/her connections when mass

installation of security patches or mass vaccination is available, i.e.,  () <



 

for





[0, )

and

 ()


=

 .

Equilibrium weight adaption outperforms social optimal weight adaptation

in terms of lowering infection level of the whole network : Using numerical

examples, Huang et al. show in Figure 6 that Even though the game-based

38

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

Fig. 6 [57] Dynamics of the whole network's infection under the differential game-based weight adaptation scheme, the optimal control-based weight adaption scheme, and the scheme without weight adaptation when  (  ()) =   ().
scheme is inefficient in terms of minimizing the total cost , it outperforms the optimal control-based scheme as we can observe that the infection level under the game-based scheme is always lower than the infection level under the optimal control based scheme. No matter what value  is, the equilibrium weight adaption scheme tends to mitigate the spreading of virus than the scheme without adaptation.
3.5.4 Discussion
The game framework formulated here by Huang et al. is, similar to the framework proposed by Eksin et al. in [26], built on a networked epidemic model. This framework allows the authors to capture the local interaction and the individual-level virus spreading. The authors here choose the deterministic epidemic models allowing them to obtain analytical results in terms of the Nash equilibrium of a finite horizon problem, while in [26], only the solution for the myopic Markovian Nash equilibrium can be computed numerically. However, since the -intertwined deterministic epidemic model is an approximation of the stochastic model and the accuracy of the approximation is only guaranteed under certain conditions [105], it not sure whether the game theoretic model built upon the approximated spreading process provides accurate approximation of human behavior. In general, the analysis of whether the equilibrium obtained under the approximated spreading process stays close to the equi-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

39

librium obtained under the stochastic process requires a significant technical leaps, and is the subject of active research.
The Nash equilibrium obtained by the authors is an open-loop solution. It is pointed out by [63] that this is appropriate in the context of the security in networks, as the instantaneous state of each individual is impossible (or very costly) to follow. But it is still worth studying whether the closed-loop Nash equilibrium and the open-loop one produce the same value of the game and whether the open-loop strategy can be implemented in a feedback way in future endeavors. Another direction of research for this type of framework is to study long-term behavior of individuals, i.e., the case when  is large or infinite.

4 Future Envision
In the previous section, we presented an overview of the current state of the art involving the game theoretic-models to study human behavior amid epidemics. However, as we demonstrated, there are still many hollows and research gaps in the results presented that need to be well taken care of. This section spotlights several of the main research challenges, to what extent they are currently being tackled, and what needs to be done.

4.1 The Justification of Game Theoretic Methods for Deterministic Models
Many game-theoretic frameworks have adopted continuous deterministic epidemic models since these models are easy to analyze and more likely to produce meaningful analytical results. Continuous deterministic models are a continuous approximation of the epidemic spreading process under the form of ODEs. The justification of passing from the original stochastic models to a continuous deterministic model in the presence of strategic interventions is barely mentioned in most papers. For example, it is unclear how the weight adaptation policies found for the -intertwined deterministic model (23) in Section 3.5 relate to the policies found for its stochastic counterpart (7) and how the social distancing policies found in Section 3.3 relate to the policies we would find for the stochastic model (6).
Gast et al. has proposed a mean-field Markov decision process framework, which provides a rigorous justification of the use of a continuous optimal control approach for the virus spreading problem, and shows that the continuous limits provide insights on the structure of the optimal behavior for the discrete stochastic epidemic model [35]. However, the work by Gast et al. is targeted for centralized problems only (optimal control problems). Tembine et al. investigated the asymptotic behavior of a Markov decision evolutionary games as the size of the population grows to infinity [99]. However, it is not clear whether these mean-field results still hold for popular continuous epidemic models when game-theoretic decision-making is involved.

40

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

4.2 The Role of the Central Authority: Mechanism Design and Information Design

Realizing the necessity of decentralized decision-making for controlling epidemics, more and more works started to pay attention to game-theoretic decentralized solutions. However, most works of this kind focused on the interactions among individuals [2, 11, 13, 16, 18, 19, 22, 25, 26, 41, 46, 47, 50, 57, 58, 65, 68, 70, 90, 91, 95, 101, 102, 115]. Some works studied the inefficiency of selfish decision making demonstrated by the price of anarchy. However, most works ignore the role of the central authority [91, 101]. Indeed, the central authority plays a significant role in controlling the epidemic spreading even when interventions are not enforceable among individuals. When individuals make their own decisions to maximize their payoffs, it is important to consider mechanism design [32] and/or information design [117] to create incentives for individuals and to achieve a certain degree of social optimum.
Only a few papers studied the role of the central authority in an epidemic when individuals care for their payoffs [8,84]. [8] proposed a Stackelberg game framework in which individuals play a non-cooperative game, and the central authority influences the nature of the resulting Nash equilibrium through incentives so as to optimize its own objective. In [84], the authors promote a mechanism design approach, on behalf of the central authority, weighing response costs vs. the social good. Some works studied how information can affect human behavior amid an epidemic [65, 108]. So far, there is no paper investigating how the central authority can disseminate information to help individuals fight against the virus.

4.3 Information Matters
Most works assume complete information in their game-theoretic frameworks [25,26,56,57,90,91]. The assumption of complete information in the context of an epidemic study is that every individual knows, when they make decisions, the health status of every other individual in the network, which is unrealistic and impractical. Hence, dynamic games with partial information or incomplete information need to be applied to studying human behavior amid an epidemic. However, works following this direction of research is rare.
Obtaining information can be costly. For example, if an individual needs to find out whether he/she is infected or not, he/she has to pay for a testing kit or spend time commuting to a testing spot. If the central authority wants to find out the infection level of the whole population, it needs to deploy a large number of resources to conduct mass testing or mass survey. How decision-makers decide when to obtain information and how frequently information needs to be updated become interesting questions worth addressing. In [100], the authors revealed a counterintuitive fact that the equilibrium level of infection increases as the users' learning rate increases. That means the more frequently the information exchanges, the higher the infection level at the equilibrium. In [55], the

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

41

authors consider costly information in a continuous Markov decision process, and the authors show it is not necessary to obtain information very often to maintain satisfactory performance. Understanding the right timing to conduct mass testing to help all decision-makers resist the diseases is essential, especially for those long-lasting low-infection-level diseases. However, this problem has not been touched on the literature yet.

4.4 Human are not Completely Rational
As with all game-theoretic models, human behavior is unlikely to completely agree with the equilibria due to lack of information or solid prior beliefs. Nevertheless, very few papers have studied the effect of bounded rationality of individuals. Recent studies have included irrationality in evolutionary games when individuals are not entirely rational [86]. Advanced solution concepts such as the `Quantal Reponse Equilibrium' have been studied to account for bounded rationality of individuals [36]. In [50], Hota et al. pointed out that humans often perceive probabilities differently from their true values, and they modeled the misperception of the infection risk among individuals. However, to understand the bounded rationality of human behavior, more studies need to be carried out in the future.

5 Conclusion
This article has provided a tutorial combined with a review about the integration of decision models into epidemic models. We focus on how game-theoretic models are coupled with epidemic models to understand the human-in-theloop epidemic spreading process. Targeted at readers from the game theory community and the dynamic game community, this review focuses more on introducing the popular epidemic models, the pros and cons of different epidemic models, and how interventions can be modeled in the epidemic models rather than the basics of game theory. We provide a taxonomy of game-theoretic framework for human-in-the-loop epidemic modelling. From the taxonomy, game theorists from different branches can identify topics that are related to them the most. Although this review focuses on disease and epidemics in the human population, similar mathematical formulations, tools, and results can extend directly to many different spreading processes including malware spreading, information dissemination, etc.
In this review, we strive for comprehensiveness. Game-theoretic modeling for epidemics is an emerging topic and fast-paced. There must be many exciting and important game-theoretic frameworks in the literature that have not been included. We encourage interested readers to keep track of the current of the art. Despite the vast amount of works studying the game-theoretic modeling for epidemics, there are still many open questions and gaps waiting to be addressed and filled, especially the ones we introduced in Section 4. We believe

42

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

game theorists and dynamic game theorists can play a significant role, address these questions, and fill the mass void in theory and in practice. Epidemics have taken and is taking a devastating toll on human society. Game-theoretic framework for understanding the human-in-the-loop epidemic spreading will make a real societal impact.

References
1. Abouelkheir, I., El Kihal, F., Rachik, M., Elmouki, I.: Optimal impulse vaccination approach for an sir control model with short-term immunity. Mathematics 7(5), 420 (2019)
2. Adiga, A., Venkat, S., Vullikanti, A.: To delay or not: temporal vaccination games on networks. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2016-The 35th Annual IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 1­9. IEEE (2016)
3. Akhil, P., Altman, E., Sundaresan, R., LINCS, P.: A mean-field approach for controlling singularly perturbed multi-population sis epidemics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05713 (2019)
4. Allen, E.: Modeling with It^o stochastic differential equations, vol. 22. Springer Science & Business Media (2007)
5. Amaral, M.A., de Oliveira, M.M., Javarone, M.A.: An epidemiological model with voluntary quarantine strategies governed by evolutionary game dynamics. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 143, 110616 (2021)
6. Andersson, H., Britton, T.: Stochastic epidemic models and their statistical analysis, vol. 151. Springer Science & Business Media (2012)
7. Ansumali, S., Kaushal, S., Kumar, A., Prakash, M.K., Vidyasagar, M.: Modelling a pandemic with asymptomatic patients, impact of lockdown and herd immunity, with applications to sars-cov-2. Annual Reviews in Control (2020)
8. Aurell, A., Carmona, R., Dayanikli, G., Lauriere, M.: Optimal incentives to mitigate epidemics: a stackelberg mean field game approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03105 (2020)
9. Bagagiolo, F., Bauso, D.: Mean-field games and dynamic demand management in power grids. Dynamic Games and Applications 4(2), 155­176 (2014)
10. Ba¸sar, T., Olsder, G.J.: Dynamic noncooperative game theory. SIAM (1998) 11. Bauch, C.T., Earn, D.J.: Vaccination and the theory of games. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 101(36), 13391­13394 (2004) 12. Bernoulli, D.: Essai d'une nouvelle analyse de la mortalit´e caus´ee par la petite v´erole,
et des avantages de l'inoculation pour la pr´evenir. Histoire de l'Acad., Roy. Sci.(Paris) avec Mem pp. 1­45 (1760) 13. Bhattacharyya, S., Bauch, C.: A game dynamic model for delayer strategies in vaccinating behaviour for pediatric infectious diseases. Journal of theoretical biology 267(3), 276­282 (2010) 14. Bieck, C., Marshall, A.: Redirecting resources to promote post-pandemic growth. Strategy & Leadership (2020) 15. Blume, L., Easley, D., Kleinberg, J., Kleinberg, R., Tardos, E´.: Network formation in the presence of contagious risk. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC) 1(2), 1­20 (2013) 16. Breban, R., Vardavas, R., Blower, S.: Mean-field analysis of an inductive reasoning game: application to influenza vaccination. Physical review E 76(3), 031127 (2007) 17. Cator, E., Van Mieghem, P.: Second-order mean-field susceptible-infected-susceptible epidemic threshold. Physical review E 85(5), 056111 (2012) 18. Chang, S.L., Piraveenan, M., Pattison, P., Prokopenko, M.: Game theoretic modelling of infectious disease dynamics and intervention methods: a review. Journal of biological dynamics 14(1), 57­89 (2020) 19. Chapman, G.B., Li, M., Vietri, J., Ibuka, Y., Thomas, D., Yoon, H., Galvani, A.P.: Using game theory to examine incentives in influenza vaccination behavior. Psychological science 23(9), 1008­1015 (2012)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

43

20. Chen, J., Huang, Y., Zhang, R., Zhu, Q.: Optimal curing strategy for competing epi-

demics spreading over complex networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information

Processing over Networks IEEE(early access), 1­1 (2021). DOI 10.1109/TSIPN.2021.

3075338

21. Chimmula, V.K.R., Zhang, L.: Time series forecasting of covid-19 transmission in

canada using lstm networks. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 135, 109864 (2020)

22. Dashtbali, M., Malek, A., Mirzaie, M.: Optimal control and differential game solu-

tions for social distancing in response to epidemics of infectious diseases on networks.

Optimal Control Applications and Methods 41(6), 2149­2165 (2020)

23. Di Lauro, F., Kiss, I.Z., Rus, D., Della Santina, C.: Covid-19 and flattening the curve:

A feedback control perspective. IEEE Control Systems Letters 5(4), 1435­1440 (2020)

24. Draief, M., Massoulie, L.: Epidemics and rumours in complex networks. Cambridge

University Press (2009)

25. Eksin, C.: Control of stochastic disease network games via influential individuals. In:

2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 6893­6898. IEEE

(2019)

26. Eksin, C., Shamma, J.S., Weitz, J.S.: Disease dynamics in a stochastic network game:

a little empathy goes a long way in averting outbreaks. Scientific reports 7(1), 1­13

(2017)

27. Erdem, M., Safan, M., Castillo-Chavez, C.: Mathematical analysis of an siqr influenza

model with imperfect quarantine. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 79(7), 1612­1636

(2017)

28. Fall, A., Iggidr, A., Sallet, G., Tewa, J.J.: Epidemiological models and lyapunov func-

tions. Mathematical Modelling of Natural Phenomena 2(1), 62­83 (2007)

29. Farhadi, F., Tavafoghi, H., Teneketzis, D., Golestani, S.J.: An efficient dynamic alloca-

tion mechanism for security in networks of interdependent strategic agents. Dynamic

Games and Applications 9(4), 914­941 (2019)

30. Feng, Y., Ding, L., Huang, Y.H., Guan, Z.H.: Epidemic spreading on random surfer

networks with infected avoidance strategy. Chinese Physics B 25(12), 128903 (2016)

31. Feng, Y., Ding, L., Huang, Y.H., Zhang, L.: Epidemic spreading on weighted net-

works with adaptive topology based on infective information. Physica A: Statistical

Mechanics and its Applications 463, 493­502 (2016)

32. Fudenberg, D., Tirole, J.: Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1991)

33. Funk, S., Gilad, E., Watkins, C., Jansen, V.A.: The spread of awareness and its impact

on epidemic outbreaks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(16),

6872­6877 (2009)

34. Ganesh, A., Massouli´e, L., Towsley, D.: The effect of network topology on the spread of

epidemics. In: Proceedings IEEE 24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer

and Communications Societies., vol. 2, pp. 1455­1466. IEEE (2005)

35. Gast, N., Gaujal, B., Le Boudec, J.Y.: Mean field for markov decision processes: from

discrete to continuous optimization. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 57(9),

2266­2280 (2012)

36. Goeree, J.K., Holt, C.A., Palfrey, T.R.: Quantal response equilibria. In: Behavioural

and Experimental Economics, pp. 234­242. Springer (2010)

37. Granell, C., Go´mez, S., Arenas, A.: Competing spreading processes on multiplex net-

works: awareness and epidemics. Physical review E 90(1), 012808 (2014)

38. Gray, A., Greenhalgh, D., Hu, L., Mao, X., Pan, J.: A stochastic differential equation

sis epidemic model. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 71(3), 876­902 (2011)

39. Gregorian, D.: Get vaccinated in ohio and get a shot

at $1 million, gov. mike dewine announces.

NBC News

(2021).

URL https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politics-news/

get-vaccinated-ohio-get-shot-1-million-gov-mike-dewine-n1267176

40. Gubar, E., Zhitkova, E.M., Kupchinenko, E., Petriakova, N.: Two modes of vaccination

program in controlled sir model. Contributions to Game Theory and Management 8(0),

84­98 (2015)

41. Hayel, Y., Zhu, Q.: Epidemic protection over heterogeneous networks using evolution-

ary poisson games. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 12(8),

1786­1800 (2017)

44

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

42. Herrera, J.L., Srinivasan, R., Brownstein, J.S., Galvani, A.P., Meyers, L.A.: Disease surveillance on complex social networks. PLoS computational biology 12(7), e1004928 (2016)
43. Hor´ak, K., Bosansky`, B.: Solving partially observable stochastic games with public observations. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 33-01, pp. 2029­2036 (2019)
44. Hossain, M.S., Muhammad, G., Guizani, N.: Explainable ai and mass surveillance system-based healthcare framework to combat covid-i9 like pandemics. IEEE Network 34(4), 126­132 (2020)
45. Hota, A.R., Godbole, J., Bhariya, P., Par´e, P.E.: A closed-loop framework for inference, prediction and control of sir epidemics on networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16185 (2020)
46. Hota, A.R., Sneh, T., Gupta, K.: Impacts of game-theoretic activation on epidemic spread over dynamical networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00445 (2020)
47. Hota, A.R., Sundaram, S.: Interdependent security games on networks under behavioral probability weighting. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 5(1), 262­273 (2016)
48. Hota, A.R., Sundaram, S.: Optimal network topologies for mitigating security and epidemic risks. In: 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pp. 1129­1136. IEEE (2016)
49. Hota, A.R., Sundaram, S.: Game-theoretic choice of curing rates against networked sis epidemics by human decision-makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01293 (2018)
50. Hota, A.R., Sundaram, S.: Game-theoretic vaccination against networked sis epidemics and impacts of human decision-making. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 6(4), 1461­1472 (2019)
51. Huang, C.T., Sakib, M.N., Njilla, L., Kamhoua, C.: A game theoretic approach for making iot device connectivity decisions during malware outbreak. In: 2019 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), pp. 457­462. IEEE (2019)
52. Huang, Y., Chen, J., Huang, L., Zhu, Q.: Dynamic games for secure and resilient control system design. National Science Review 7(7), 1125­1141 (2020)
53. Huang, Y., Ding, L., Feng, Y.: A novel epidemic spreading model with decreasing infection rate based on infection times. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 444, 1041­1048 (2016)
54. Huang, Y., Ding, L., Feng, Y., Pan, J.: Epidemic spreading in random walkers with heterogeneous interaction radius. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2016(10), 103501 (2016)
55. Huang, Y., Kavitha, V., Zhu, Q.: Continuous-time markov decision processes with controlled observations. In: 2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pp. 32­39. IEEE (2019)
56. Huang, Y., Zhu, Q.: Achieving social optimum in dynamic weight adaptation for virus mitigation: A potential differential game approach. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52(20), 241­ 246 (2019)
57. Huang, Y., Zhu, Q.: A differential game approach to decentralized virus-resistant weight adaptation policy over complex networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 7(2), 944­955 (2020)
58. Ibuka, Y., Li, M., Vietri, J., Chapman, G.B., Galvani, A.P.: Free-riding behavior in vaccination decisions: an experimental study. PloS one 9(1), e87164 (2014)
59. Isaacs, R.: Differential games: a mathematical theory with applications to warfare and pursuit, control and optimization. Courier Corporation (1999)
60. Kephart, J.O., White, S.R.: Directed-graph epidemiological models of computer viruses. In: Computation: the micro and the macro view, pp. 71­102. World Scientific (1992)
61. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics. ii.--the problem of endemicity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, containing papers of a mathematical and physical character 138(834), 55­83 (1932)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

45

62. Khanafer, A., Ba¸sar, T., Gharesifard, B.: Stability properties of infection diffusion dynamics over directed networks. In: 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 6215­6220. IEEE (2014)
63. Khouzani, M., Sarkar, S., Altman, E.: Saddle-point strategies in malware attack. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 30(1), 31­43 (2011)
64. K¨ohler, J., Schwenkel, L., Koch, A., Berberich, J., Pauli, P., Allgo¨wer, F.: Robust and optimal predictive control of the covid-19 outbreak. Annual Reviews in Control (2020)
65. Lagos, A.R., Kordonis, I., Papavassilopoulos, G.: Games of social distancing during an epidemic: Local vs statistical information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.05185 (2020)
66. Lee, W., Liu, S., Tembine, H., Li, W., Osher, S.: Controlling propagation of epidemics via mean-field control. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 81(1), 190­207 (2021)
67. Li, K., Zhang, H., Zhu, G., Small, M., Fu, X.: Suboptimal control and targeted constant control for semi-random epidemic networks. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems (2019)
68. Li, X.J., Li, C., Li, X.: Minimizing social cost of vaccinating network sis epidemics. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 5(4), 326­335 (2017)
69. Liu, X., Lin, K., Wang, L., Zhang, H.: Stochastic evolutionary game analysis between special committees and ceo: Incentive and supervision. Dynamic Games and Applications pp. 1­18 (2020)
70. Liu, X.T., Wu, Z.X., Zhang, L.: Impact of committed individuals on vaccination behavior. Physical Review E 86(5), 051132 (2012)
71. Mahrouf, M., Lotfi, E.M., Hattaf, K., Yousfi, N.: Non-pharmaceutical interventions and vaccination controls in a stochastic sivr epidemic model. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems pp. 1­19 (2020)
72. Mai, V.S., Battou, A., Mills, K.: Distributed algorithm for suppressing epidemic spread in networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters 2(3), 555­560 (2018)
73. Mercer, T.R., Salit, M.: Testing at scale during the covid-19 pandemic. Nature Reviews Genetics pp. 1­12 (2021)
74. Newman, M.: Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press (2010) 75. Nowzari, C., Preciado, V.M., Pappas, G.J.: Analysis and control of epidemics: A survey
of spreading processes on complex networks. IEEE Control Systems Magazine 36(1), 26­46 (2016) 76. Ogura, M., Preciado, V.M.: Efficient containment of exact sir markovian processes on networks. In: 2016 IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 967­972. IEEE (2016) 77. Omic, J., Orda, A., Van Mieghem, P.: Protecting against network infections: A game theoretic perspective. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2009, pp. 1485­1493. IEEE (2009) 78. Par´e, P.E., Beck, C.L., Ba¸sar, T.: Modeling, estimation, and analysis of epidemics over networks: An overview. Annual Reviews in Control (2020) 79. Par´e, P.E., Beck, C.L., Nedi´c, A.: Epidemic processes over time-varying networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 5(3), 1322­1334 (2017) 80. Parino, F., Zino, L., Porfiri, M., Alessandro, R.: Modelling and predicting the effect of social distancing and travel restrictions on covid-19 spreading. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 18(175), 20200875 (2021) 81. Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A.: Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex networks. Physical Review E 63(6), 066117 (2001) 82. Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A.: Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Physical review letters 86(14), 3200 (2001) 83. Patro, G.K., Chakraborty, A., Banerjee, A., Ganguly, N.: Towards safety and sustainability: Designing local recommendations for post-pandemic world. In: Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 358­367 (2020) 84. Pej´o, B., Bicz´ok, G.: Corona games: Masks, social distancing and mechanism design. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Modeling and Understanding the Spread of COVID-19, pp. 24­31 (2020) 85. Pezzutto, M., Rossell´o, N.B., Schenato, L., Garone, E.: Smart testing and selective quarantine for the control of epidemics. Annual Reviews in Control (2021) 86. Poletti, P., Ajelli, M., Merler, S.: Risk perception and effectiveness of uncoordinated behavioral responses in an emerging epidemic. Mathematical Biosciences 238(2), 80­ 89 (2012)

46

Yunhan Huang, Quanyan Zhu

87. Poletti, P., Caprile, B., Ajelli, M., Pugliese, A., Merler, S.: Spontaneous behavioural changes in response to epidemics. Journal of theoretical biology 260(1), 31­40 (2009)
88. Possieri, C., Rizzo, A.: A mathematical framework for modeling propagation of infectious diseases with mobile individuals. In: 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 3750­3755. IEEE (2019)
89. Preciado, V.M., Zargham, M., Enyioha, C., Jadbabaie, A., Pappas, G.: Optimal vaccine allocation to control epidemic outbreaks in arbitrary networks. In: 52nd IEEE conference on decision and control, pp. 7486­7491. IEEE (2013)
90. Reluga, T.C.: Game theory of social distancing in response to an epidemic. PLoS Comput Biol 6(5), e1000793 (2010)
91. Reluga, T.C., Bauch, C.T., Galvani, A.P.: Evolving public perceptions and stability in vaccine uptake. Mathematical biosciences 204(2), 185­198 (2006)
92. Rhee, I., Shin, M., Hong, S., Lee, K., Kim, S.J., Chong, S.: On the levy-walk nature of human mobility. IEEE/ACM transactions on networking 19(3), 630­643 (2011)
93. Rieger, M.O., He-Ulbricht, Y.: German and chinese dataset on attitudes regarding covid-19 policies, perception of the crisis, and belief in conspiracy theories. Data in Brief 33, 106384 (2020)
94. Rothe, C., Schunk, M., Sothmann, P., Bretzel, G., Froeschl, G., Wallrauch, C., Zimmer, T., Thiel, V., Janke, C., Guggemos, W., et al.: Transmission of 2019-ncov infection from an asymptomatic contact in germany. New England journal of medicine 382(10), 970­971 (2020)
95. Saha, S., Adiga, A., Vullikanti, A.K.S.: Equilibria in epidemic containment games. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 777­783 (2014)
96. Shen, S., Li, H., Han, R., Vasilakos, A.V., Wang, Y., Cao, Q.: Differential game-based strategies for preventing malware propagation in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 9(11), 1962­1973 (2014)
97. Sparks, R., Keighley, T., Muscatello, D.: Optimal exponentially weighted moving average (ewma) plans for detecting seasonal epidemics when faced with non-homogeneous negative binomial counts. Journal of Applied Statistics 38(10), 2165­2181 (2011)
98. Tembine, H.: Covid-19: Data-driven mean-field-type game perspective. Games 11(4), 51 (2020)
99. Tembine, H., Le Boudec, J.Y., El-Azouzi, R., Altman, E.: Mean field asymptotics of markov decision evolutionary games and teams. In: 2009 International Conference on Game Theory for Networks, pp. 140­150. IEEE (2009)
100. Theodorakopoulos, G., Le Boudec, J.Y., Baras, J.S.: Selfish response to epidemic propagation. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 58(2), 363­376 (2012)
101. Trajanovski, S., Hayel, Y., Altman, E., Wang, H., Van Mieghem, P.: Decentralized protection strategies against sis epidemics in networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 2(4), 406­419 (2015)
102. Trajanovski, S., Kuipers, F.A., Hayel, Y., Altman, E., Van Mieghem, P.: Designing virus-resistant, high-performance networks: a game-formation approach. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 5(4), 1682­1692 (2017)
103. Valler, N.C., Prakash, B.A., Tong, H., Faloutsos, M., Faloutsos, C.: Epidemic spread in mobile ad hoc networks: Determining the tipping point. In: International Conference on Research in Networking, pp. 266­280. Springer (2011)
104. Van Mieghem, P., van de Bovenkamp, R.: Accuracy criterion for the mean-field approximation in susceptible-infected-susceptible epidemics on networks. Physical Review E 91(3), 032812 (2015)
105. Van Mieghem, P., Omic, J., Kooij, R.: Virus spread in networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions On Networking 17(1), 1­14 (2008)
106. Wang, J., Wang, W., Wang, C.: Modeling and analysis of conflicting information propagation in a finite time horizon. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 28(3), 972­985 (2020)
107. Wang, Y., Chakrabarti, D., Wang, C., Faloutsos, C.: Epidemic spreading in real networks: An eigenvalue viewpoint. In: 22nd International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2003. Proceedings., pp. 25­34. IEEE (2003)
108. Wang, Z., Xia, C., Chen, Z., Chen, G.: Epidemic propagation with positive and negative preventive information in multiplex networks. IEEE transactions on cybernetics (2020)

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

47

109. Watkins, N.J., Nowzari, C., Pappas, G.J.: Robust economic model predictive control of continuous-time epidemic processes. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 65(3), 1116­1131 (2019)
110. Watkins, N.J., Nowzari, C., Preciado, V.M., Pappas, G.J.: Optimal resource allocation for competitive spreading processes on bilayer networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems 5(1), 298­307 (2016)
111. Xu, Z., Khanafer, A., Ba¸sar, T.: Competition over epidemic networks: Nash and stackelberg games. In: 2015 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 2063­2068. IEEE (2015)
112. Xue, D., Hirche, S.: Distributed topology manipulation to control epidemic spreading over networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 67(5), 1163­1174 (2018)
113. Yaesoubi, R., Cohen, T.: Generalized markov models of infectious disease spread: A novel framework for developing dynamic health policies. European Journal of Operational Research 215(3), 679­687 (2011)
114. Yang, W.: Modeling covid-19 pandemic with hierarchical quarantine and time delay. Dynamic Games and Applications pp. 1­23 (2021)
115. Zhang, H.F., Yang, Z., Wu, Z.X., Wang, B.H., Zhou, T.: Braess's paradox in epidemic game: better condition results in less payoff. Scientific reports 3(1), 1­8 (2013)
116. Zhang, L., Xu, J.: Differential security game in heterogeneous device-to-device offloading network under epidemic risks. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 7(3), 1852­1861 (2019)
117. Zhang, T., Zhu, Q.: Informational design of dynamic multi-agent system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03052 (2021)
118. Zhao, D., Wang, L., Wang, Z., Xiao, G.: Virus propagation and patch distribution in multiplex networks: modeling, analysis, and optimal allocation. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 14(7), 1755­1767 (2018)
119. Zhu, L., Zhou, X., Li, Y., Zhu, Y.: Stability and bifurcation analysis on a delayed epidemic model with information-dependent vaccination. Physica Scripta 94(12), 125202 (2019)

