Homological duality for covering groups of reductive p-adic groups

arXiv:2106.00437v1 [math.RT] 1 Jun 2021

Drago Fril and Dipendra Prasad
June 2, 2021
To Dick Gross, on the occasion of his 70th anniversary, with admiration.
Abstract
In this largely expository paper we extend properties of the homological duality functor RHomH(-, H) where H is the Hecke algebra of a reductive p-adic group, to the case where it is the Hecke algebra of a finite central extension of a reductive p-adic group. The most important properties being that RHomH(-, H) is concentrated in a single degree for irreducible representations and that it gives rise to Schneider­ Stuhler duality for Ext groups (a Serre functor like property). Our simple proof is self-contained and bypasses the localization techniques of [SS97, Bez04] improving slightly on [NP20]. Along the way we also study Grothendieck­Serre duality with respect to the Bernstein center and provide a proof of the folklore result that on admissible modules this functor is nothing but the contragredient duality. We single out a necessary and sufficient condition for when these three dualities agree on finite length modules in a given block. In particular, we show this is the case for all cuspidal blocks as well as, due to a result of Roche [Roc02], on all blocks with trivial stabilizer in the relative Weyl group.

Contents

1 Introduction

2

2 Categorical generalities

9

3 Splitting the category of representations

15

4 Basic notions of representation theory

22

5 Basic theorems

25

6 The Bernstein decomposition

26

7 Second adjointness theorem

30

8 Blocks as module categories

35

1

9 An abstract duality theorem

40

10 Homological duality

45

11 The duality theorem of Schneider­Stuhler

51

12 Dualities on finite length representations

52

1 Introduction

1.1
Let G be a reductive p-adic group or a covering group (finite central extension) of such a group. The homological duality for the abelian category M(G) of smooth representations of G is defined at the level of derived categories as

Dh := RHomH(-, H) : Db(M(G))  Db(M(G))op

where H is the Hecke algebra of G.
An important property established by Bernstein in his Harvard notes [Ber92] is that if  is irreducible then Dh() is concentrated in a single degree (and is irreducible). We will denote this representation by Dh().
On the other hand, in [SS97] Schneider and Stuhler also prove this property using localization techniques on the Bruhat-Tits building. Moreover, they show that this functor Dh enjoys a Serre functor like property, namely that for any irreducible representation  of G and any smooth representation  of G, there is a natural isomorphism

ExtiG(,  ) ExtdG()-i( , Dh()).

(1.1)

Actually in [SS97] this was proved only in the subcategory of representations with a fixed central character. The more general version was proved in [NP20] and [BBK18].
One of the aims of this work is to present a direct proof of (1.1) for covering groups that does not make use of [SS97] or of localization techniques. The strategy is to first show that the full homological duality Dh satisfies a Serre functor like property

RHomH(,  ) RHomH( , Dh())

for any finitely generated representations  and  . This is easy and follows from basic adjunctions naturally extended to idempotented algebras. For convenience of the reader, and for lack of a precise reference, we provide all the details in Section 9.
The second step, namely showing that Dh() is concentrated in a single degree for an irreducible representation, is non-formal and is based on several ingredients: Bernstein decomposition, second adjointness and a special property of the algebra governing a cuspidal block (Frobenius-symmetric algebra over its center). Although the proof is already in [Ber92] we hope that the argument that we present is more streamlined.

2

Another property of the homological functor Dh is that on finite length cuspidal representations it agrees (up to a shift) with the contragredient functor. A sketch of this result for irreducible representations appears already in [Ber92] but we were not able to supply the details so we decided to include a different proof with full details. To this effect we were led to study the Grothendieck­Serre duality over the Bernstein center DGS/Z (see Section 12.2 for the definition). In particular we provide a proof of the folklore result that DGS/Z agrees with the contragredient for admissible representations. Moreover we identify a necessary and sufficient condition (see (FsG)) for the two functors Dh and DGS/Z to agree (up to a shift) on a Bernstein block. In order to state the condition, we need to introduce some notation.
If s = [, L] is a cuspidal datum, up to conjugation and inertia, then there is an equivalence of the Bernstein's block M(G)s with the module category mod-Rs for some algebra Rs with center Zs that can be described explicitly (see Theorem 8.12). The condition alluded to before, which we call Frobenius-symmetric-Gorenstein, since it is reminiscent of both these properties, is
DGS/Zs(Rs) Rs[d] as Rs-bimodules
where d = d(s) is the split rank of the center of L (equals the Krull dimension of Zs). We are able to check this condition on a cuspidal block s = (, G) because in this case Zs is a Laurent-polynomial algebra and Rs is Azumaya (see Proposition 8.4 and Corollary 8.6). Therefore we deduce that on all finite length cuspidal representations in a given block, the homological duality and the Grothendieck­Serre duality agree with the contragredient duality. Moreover, if s = [L, ] is a cuspidal datum, by a result of Roche [Roc02, Theorem 3.1], parabolic induction induces an equivalence of the blocks M(L)[]  M(G)s if and only if the stabilizer of the inertia class [] in the relative Weyl group NG(L)/L is trivial, i.e., if and only if there is no non-trivial w  NG(L)/L such that w  for some unramified character  of L. We also deduce that for these blocks, Dh and DGS/Z agree (up to a shift).
There is yet another duality1 on smooth representations, namely the Aubert­Zelevinski duality. Originally, it arose in representation theory of finite groups of Lie type where it was defined on the Grothendieck group of finite dimensional representations. Deligne­Lusztig introduced what is now called the Deligne­Lusztig complex in order to have a definition of the involution at the level of representations. For p-adic groups as well as their covering groups, the involution so constructed is usually called the Aubert­Zelevinski involution. It can be proved ([Aub95, BBK18, Bez04]) that the Aubert­Zelevinski involution defines an exact functor from the abelian category M(G~) to itself, hence it extends trivially to a functor on the derived category Db(M(G):
DAZ : Db(M(G))  Db(M(G)).
At the level of Grothendieck groups, it was also shown in [Aub95] that DAZ commutes with the contragredient and also commutation formulae with the parabolic induction and restriction functors were provided. None of these are known for representations, say of finite length, of covering groups, as even for linear groups, all these assertions are proved
1It is indeed involutive but covariant and so the name duality is slightly misleading.
3

by relating Aubert-Zelevinski involution with the homological duality, and that is not available for covering groups.

The same involution was considered by Schneider­Stuhler in [SS97] and by Bezrukavnikov in [Bez04, Theorem 4.13] where the following isomorphism of functors was proved using localization techniques

DAZ  DGS/Z = Dh.

(1.2)

Actually, in [SS97] this was shown only for finite length modules and in the Grothendieck group whereas in [Bez04] the more general result was established. This isomorphism was recently revisited in [BBK18] where a simpler proof was given using the geometry of the wonderful compactification.

Results similar to Aubert's were proved in the context of smooth representations of covering groups in the work of Ban­Jantzen [BJ, BJ16] (again for the Grothendieck group of finite length representations). In this work we do not address the question of whether (1.2) holds for covering groups nor do we study the Aubert­Zelevinsky involution in this context. An immediate obstacle to generalizing the approach of [BBK18] is that as covering groups are no longer linear, we do not have at our disposal an obvious wonderful compactification. However, in favor of the isomorphism (1.2) is the fact that [d]  Dh = DGS/Z on cuspidal blocks, a result that we prove in Section 12.2. By the aforementioned result of Roche, this continues to be the case for blocks s = [L, ] such that the stabilizer of the inertia class of  is trivial in the relative Weyl group NG(L)/L.
One reason for interest in homological duality, and the attendant Serre functor property, is in the context of Ext analogues of branching laws, as discussed in [Pra18]. Recall that usually the branching laws in the context of p-adic group are considered for a representation 1 of a reductive group G to a representation 2 of a closed subgroup H, as HomH(1, 2) (and never as HomH(2, 1)). It has been suggested in [Pra18] that the success of these branching laws in the various cases studied stems from the vanishing of ExtiH(1, 2), i > 0, whereas by the Serre functor property, ExtiH(2, 1) = 0, i < d(2). In particular, HomH(2, 1) is typically zero (so no wonder it is never considered!), and shows up only through the higher extension groups, i.e., ExtdH(2)(2, 1).
A big chunk of the paper is expository: we give an exposition of some basic representation theoretic results in this context to show that they generalize in a naive way to the case of covering groups culminating with Bernstein's decomposition (following closely the linear setting). We also include a sketch of the proof of second adjointness (following the exposition in [Ren10, VI.9.7] of the linear case which makes use of completion functors in order to streamline the argument). Then we include a short discussion of Grothendieck­ Serre duality limiting ourselves to the context that is sufficient for the applications we have in mind. The reader familiar with the above classical results should directly consult §10, §11, §12, §9.

1.2
Below follows a more precise description of our work. Let G = G(F ) be a p-adic reductive group and let G be a finite covering group of G. Denote by H the Hecke algebra of G
4

and by M(G) the category of smooth complex representations of G. The Levi subgroups and parabolic subgroups of G are, by definition, the pullbacks of those of G. We have parabolic induction and restriction functors (Jacquet modules) defined as in the linear case. A representation is called cuspidal if it is killed by all proper parabolic restriction functors.
We denote by B(G) the equivalence classes (conjugation and inertia) of pairs (L, ) of a Levi subgroup L and an irreducible cuspidal representation  of L.
The following is the Bernstein decomposition for G (see [Ber92, Ber84, Ren10] for the linear case):
Theorem 1.1. We have a block decomposition

M(G)

M(G)s.

sB(G)

Moreover, each block M(G)s is equivalent to the category of modules over some C-algebra Rs containing a finitely generated commutative subalgebra over which it is finite.
We will outline the proof in Section 6 which follows closely the linear case as exposed in [Ber92] or [Ren10]. To that end, and to fix the notation, we will collect in Sections 1, 2, 3, 4 all the necessary results from the classical theory (i.e., the linear case) as well as some rudiments from category theory that go into the proof of it. This is meant to convince the reader that the same strategy as in the linear case gives also the Bernstein decomposition for covering groups.
Using the second adjointness theorem of Bernstein, we prove the equivalence of M(G)s with mod-Rs in Section 8. For completeness, we also give in Section 7 a skeleton of the proof of the second adjointness which is again meant to convince the reader that the proof from the linear case goes through without changes for covering groups. The argument we present follows [Ren10] rather than [Ber92] in that it uses completion of modules in order to streamline the proof. We take advantage of this opportunity to introduce the completion functors in Section 7.1 and we show that (at least on admissible representations) it allows one to recover the lost properties of the invariants (-)N functor. See also Corollary 7.14 for a far more advanced version (essentially equivalent to the second adjointness theorem).
For an irreducible representation , the block s = [L, ] that corresponds to  is called the cuspidal support of . We denote by d() = d(s) = d(L), the dimension of a maximal split torus in the center of the algebraic group L.
The category of (smooth) representations of G has finite global dimension (see Section 2.6). Consider the homological duality functor Dh on the bounded derived category of G-modules
Dh := RHomH(-, H) : Db(M(G))  Db(M(G))op.
It is surprisingly easy to show that2 ( )  Dh satisfies a Serre-functor-like property for the full RHom, namely:
2In the context of finite dimensional algebras, this functor is called Nakayama duality, and it was observed in [BK89, 3.2 Example 3] that it is a Serre functor.

5

Theorem 1.2. (see Corollary 9.11) For ,   Db(M(G)) with  finitely generated, we have a natural pairing of complexes of C-vector spaces

RHomH(,



)

L C

RHomH(

,

Dh())



RHomH(,

Dh())



C

providing a natural isomorphism

RHomH(,  ) = RHomH( , Dh())

where (-) is taking the dual vector space degree-wise.

Notice that we do not claim that RHomH(, Dh())  C is an isomorphism in general but merely that such a canonical map exists.

For a parabolic P with Levi decomposition P = LN , we denote by iG (resp., rG ) the

L,P

L,P

parabolic induction (resp., restriction) functors. Here are further homological properties

that one can prove about Dh:

Theorem 1.3. The functor Dh : Db(M(G))  (Db(M(G)))op enjoys the following properties

1. If   M(G)fls is a finite length representation in a fixed Bernstein block, then Dh() is concentrated in degree d(s),

2. Dh2 Id, 3. If  is cuspidal of finite length and lives in a single block, then Dh() = [-d()],

4.

Dh



iG
L,P

=

iG
L,P -



Dh

and

Dh



rG L,P

= rG L,P

 Dh,

5. Dh := Dh[d(s)] restricted to finite length representations in M(G)s is an exact involution providing an equivalence

Dh : M(G)fls - (M(G)fls)op,
where s is the contragredient block of s
Partt (1) is proved in Section 10.1. The involution statement is shown in Corollary 10.7. Partt (3) is showed in Section 12.2 after a quick interlude on the Grothendieck­Serre duality. The commutation with parabolic induction and restriction is dealt with in Section 10.2. The last partt is a consequence of (1),(2) and (3). See also Corollary 10.7.
Let us say a few words about the Grothendieck­Serre duality which we will briefly review in Section 12 in the generality that we need. Any representation   M(G), besides having an action of G, has also an action of the Bernstein center Z, and by definition these two actions commute. Therefore, any operation that one does to a Z-module will produce again a G-module. The most trivial operation one can think of is taking the contragredient. This works well, in the sense that it is an involution, on admissible representations. One would like to extend the contragredient in a functorial way to all finitely generated modules such that it stays an involution. Working with a fixed Bernstein block at a time, the question now is sent in the commutative algebra court: we have a nice ring (invariants

6

under a finite group of a Laurent polynomial algebra, in particular Cohen­Macaulay) and finitely generated modules over it. We would like to extend the contragredient from finite length modules to all finitely generated modules in such a way that it stays an involution. One way to do this, coming from algebraic geometry, is to use the Grothendieck­Serre duality. Although all the properties are nice and formal, one must now work in the derived category since the abelian category of modules is not preserved anymore under this duality.
For a commutative regular ring A of Krull dimension d, the normalized dualizing (or canonical) complex is defined to be A := A[d]  Db(A-mod), where A = d1A is the module of top differentials on A. If A  B is a finite map of commutative rings and A is the normalized dualizing complex of A, then B := RHomA(B, A ) is the normalized dualizing complex of B.
In our context, the (component of the) Bernstein center Zs is Cohen­Macaulay hence it is finite free over a regular subalgebra. The above paragraph allows us to see that it has a normalized dualizing complex which moreover lives in a single degree (this is a characterization of Cohen­Macaulay rings).
For a commutative ring A with a normalized dualizing complex A , one defines the Grothendieck­Serre duality as
DGS : Db(A-mod)  (Db(A-mod))op M  RHomA(M, A ).
This has the nice property of being an involution DG2 S Id when restricted to finitely generated modules. It is not obvious to compute DGS(M ) for a particular module M . In general, it is a complex of modules even if M is only a module.
However, a particular case in which DGS(M ) is easy to compute is that of finite length modules M (over an arbitrary ring A!). Indeed, we have DGS(M ) = M  for any M  A-mod of finite length. For convenience of the reader we include (the short) proof of this in Section 12.
Going back to the category of smooth representations of G, we have the Grothendieck­Serre duality with respect to the Bernstein's center (component by component, see Section 12.2.)
DGS/Z : Db(M(G))  (Db(M(G)))op   RHomZ (, Z )sm
where the superscript "sm" means taking smooth vectors. On finitely generated representations it is an involution, i.e., DG2 S/Z Id.
In order to make sure we extended the contragredient from admissible to all finitely generated one needs to check that DGS/Z() =  for all admissible representations  of G. This is a folklore result whose (again easy and rather formal) proof we include for the convenience of the reader and for lack of a better reference (see Corollary 12.23).
Going back to homological duality, this allows us to prove point (3) of Theorem 1.3. Additionally, it permits us to understand precisely under what conditions do we have
7

an isomorphism [d]  Dh DGS/Z on a given block. For precise details, we refer to Corollary 12.28 and condition (FsG).

Returning to homological duality and its Serre functor property, let us state the main result we are interested in this work. For   M(G)fls , a finite length representation in a Bernstein block, we put Dh() = Hd()(Dh()) to be the unique non-zero cohomology of Dh() (see Theorem 1.3(1)).
Theorem 1.4. (see Theorem 11.1) Let   M(G)s be of finite length and   M(G) be arbitrary. Then the following natural pairing is perfect

ExtiG(,



)



Extd()-i( G

,

Dh())



Extd()(, G

Dh())



C.

The proof is an easy consequence of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 1.3. It is an improvement of the results of [NP20] where the theorem was proved only for  irreducible.
Remark 1.5.
1. As in the linear case, it would be desirable to have an identification of Dh with DAZ  (-), where DAZ is the Aubert­Zelevinsky duality, similar to [BBK18], [SS97, Proposition IV.5.1] (Grothendieck group) or [Bez04, Theorem 4.2]. This is not at all discussed in this paper. However, one can consult [BJ16] for a discussion of Aubert­Zelevinsky duality for finite central extensions of reductive p-adic groups (in the Grothendieck group of representations).
2. As already mentioned, the duality Theorem 1.2 was first proved in [SS97, Duality Theorem] using a more involved argument. Their strategy was to first show the vanishing of Ext groups from Theorem 1.3(1) and then proceed to prove the isomorphism from Theorem 1.2 using this vanishing. Both steps hinge on nice projective resolutions constructed from the Bruhat-Tits building. The advantage of the proof that we present is that by keeping the homological duality functor Dh at the derived level, the duality theorem becomes very easy and requires no technology. Once the vanishing of Ext-groups Theorem 1.3(1) is proved (for which we follow the argument in [Ber92]) we immediately deduce the required duality theorem at the level of abelian categories.
Acknowledgments
D.F. would like to thank IIT Mumbai, where this work has started, for their hospitality. The second author thanks SERB, India for its support through the JC Bose Fellowship, JBR/2020/000006. His work was also supported by a grant of the Government of the Russian Federation for the state support of scientific research carried out under the agreement 14.W03.31.0030 dated 15.02.2018. We would like to thank Roman Bezrukavnikov for some very useful remarks concerning homological duality and Grothendieck­Serre duality.

8

2 Categorical generalities
2.1 Preliminaries on decomposing categories and centers
Given Ci, i  I, a family of abelian categories, we can define the product category C := iI Ci through the usual universal property. Concretely, one constructs it as follows:
· the objects are tuples (Xi)iI with Xi  Ci for every i  I; · the morphisms are defined by
HomC((Xi)i, (Yj)j) := HomCi(Xi, Yi);
iI
· the projection functors i : C  Ci send a tuple (Xs)s to Xi. The universal property of a product is immediately verified. In addition to the projection functors i : C  Ci, there are also natural inclusion functors
i : Ci  C
sending an object X  Ci to the tuple that has X in position i and 0 everywhere else. By construction, the functor i is fully faithful so we can think of the category Ci as a full subcategory of the product category C. We will drop the functor i from the notation most of the time. Two such subcategories Ci and Cj for i = j are (derived) orthogonal, namely
ExtkC(Xi, Xj) = 0, for all k  0.
Moreover we notice that the object (Xi)i  C is the direct sum of the objects i(Xi) in C. Indeed, let us check the universal property for direct sums: for an arbitrary object Y = (Yi)i  C we have
HomC((Xi)i, (Yi)i) = HomCi(Xi, Yi)
i
= HomC(i(Xi), (Yj)j)
i
= HomC(ii(Xi), (Yj)j).
As a summary, we have a category C with full subcategories Ci, i  I that are two by two derived orthogonal and moreover every object of C is a direct sum of objects from Ci (the subcategories Ci split the category C). Conversely, a category C with full subcategories Ci, i  I, with the above properties is a direct product of Ci provided we assume a small technical condition on the categories that we work with which in practice is always verified.
Proposition 2.1. (cf. [Ber84, §1.9]) Let C be an abelian category and let Ci  C, i  I be full abelian subcategories of C. Assume that
1. C admits direct sums indexed by I,
2. every object of C can be written as a direct sum of objects of Ci,
9

3. HomC(Xi, Xj) = 0 for all Xi  Ci, Yj  Cj and i = j. 4. If Xi  Ci, i  I and f : Y  iXi is such that proji  f = 0 for all i  I then
f = 0.3
Then the natural functor i Ci  C is an equivalence of categories.
Proof. There is a natural functor i Ci  C given by (Xi)i  iXi that is well defined by assumption (1). By (2) it is essentially surjective. In order to show that it is an equivalence it remains to check that it is fully faithful. Given this observation and taking into account assumptions (3) and (4), we have

Hom

i Ci((Xi)i, (Yi)i) = HomCi(Xi, Yi) i = HomC(Xi, jYj) i = HomC(iXi, jYj)

which proves the fully-faithfulness.

Definition 2.2. Given an abelian category C, we define its center Z(C) to be End(IdC), the endomorphisms of the identity functor.
Remark 2.3. The center of a category is preserved under categorical equivalence.
Since C is additive we see that Z(C) is a commutative ring with unit. Moreover, the category C becomes naturally Z(C)-enriched, i.e., the Hom spaces in C have a natural action of Z(C) making them Z(C)-modules and C into a Z(C)-linear category.
Example 2.4. If C = A-mod for an algebra A with unit, then it is not hard to see that Z(C) is the center Z(A) of A.
For e  Z(C) an idempotent we denote by eC its image in C: it is the full subcategory consisting of those objects on which e acts by identity.
A similar argument as in Proposition 2.1 proves the first part of
Proposition 2.5. If C i Ci then Z(C) i Z(Ci). Conversely, if Z(C) i Zi then the identity of each Zi provides an idempotent ei  Z(C) and we have C i eiC.
Proof. Only the last part is non-trivial and it follows by applying Proposition 2.1.

The following is a generalization of Example 2.4 for algebras without unit but with enough idempotents. An algebra A is said to have enough idempotents if for any element a  A there exists an idempotent e  A such that ae = ea = a.
A left A-module M is said to be non-degenerate if for any m  M there exists an idempotent e  A such that em = m. The category of non-degenerate left A-modules is denoted as A-modnd
3There are pathological examples where this condition is not satisfied.

10

If Ao is the opposite algebra to A, then A := HomAo(A, A) is the space of right A-invariant maps from A to A. We can write A = HomA0(l-im eA, A) = lim- Ae where the limit is taken over all the idempotents of A. Clearly A is an A-bimodule.
Proposition 2.6 ([Ber84, Lemme 1.5] or [Ren10, I.1.7]). The center of the category A-modnd is identified with the center of A as an A-bimodule (i.e., with the A-bimodule endomorphisms of A). It can be further identified with lim- Z(eAe) where e goes over all idempotents of A.
In our context, the abelian categories that we will encounter will be equivalent to module categories over a unitary ring and as such their center is just the center of the corresponding ring.
We use a standard tool from category theory to detect when an abelian category is equivalent to a module category.
Recall that a functor F : C  D is called faithful (resp., fully-faithful) if for any objects A, B  C it induces an injective (resp., bijective) map on Hom spaces:
HomC(A, B)  HomD(F (A), F (B)).
One calls F essentially surjective if every object in D is isomorphic to the image through F of an object from C.
A basic theorem in category theory says that F : C  D is an equivalence of categories if and only if it is essentially surjective and fully-faithful.
An object P of an abelian category A is called
1. compact (or finite) if HomA(P, -) commutes with arbitrary coproducts(=direct sums),
2. projective if HomA(P, -) is exact, 3. a generator if HomA(P, -) is faithful (injective on Hom spaces), 4. progenerator if it is projective and a generator.
Proposition 2.7 (see [Par70, 4.11]). Let A be an abelian category admitting coproducts. For a compact progenerator P of A the functor
A  mod- EndA(P ) X  HomA(P, X)
is an equivalence of categories between A and the category of left modules over the ring EndA(P ).
2.2 Serre functors
The notion of a Serre functor for an additive category was introduced in [BK89] in order to capture duality phenomena similar to Serre's duality theorem on smooth projective varieties. It is intimately related to questions of representability of certain functors.
11

Moreover this turns out to be a very rigid notion. In particular, if a Serre functor exists then it is unique (up to natural isomorphism).
Definition 2.8. [Huy06, Definition 1.28][BK89, Definition 3.1] Let C be a k-linear category. A Serre functor on C is the data of an equivalence of categories S : C  C together with natural isomorphisms
A,B : HomC(A, B)  HomC(B, S(A)), for all A, B  C.
Remark 2.9. It is observed in [Huy06, Lemma 1.30] that if one assumes the categories C1, C2 to have finite dimensional Hom spaces with S1, S2 Serre functors, then any functorial isomorphism between the categories C1, C2 commutes with the Serre functors.
An example of a Serre functor, actually one that motivated the notion, is the classical Serre duality. Namely, let X be a smooth projective variety over k of dimension d and denote by X its canonical sheaf. Then Serre duality stipulates a natural isomorphism
ExtiOX (F , G) ExtdO-Xi(G, F  X ), for all F , G  Db(Coh(X)).
In other words, the functor
-  X[d] : Db(Coh(X))  Db(Coh(X))
is a Serre functor.
A simpler example comes from finite dimensional algebras and is known as the Nakayama functor, see [BK89, §3.2, Example 3]. Let A be a finite dimensional algebra over k and suppose it has finite homological dimension. (Although there are no nontrivial finite dimensional commutative algebras of finite homological dimension, there are many noncommutative ones, for example, there are constructions using Quivers.) We consider the derived category C := Dfbd(A-mod) of finite dimensional left A-modules. There are two duality functors
Dfbd(A-mod)  Dfbd(mod-A) (-) Dfbd(A-mod),
where (M ) = RHomA(M, A) and M  = RHomDb(k)(M, k) for any object M  Db(A-mod). We put DNak := (-)   and call it the Nakayama functor.
The following proposition is very easy to prove from classical adjunctions and our results in Section 9 are essentially a detailed version of it for idempotented algebras (see Theorem 9.7):
Proposition 2.10. The Nakayama functor DNak : Dfbd(A-mod)  Dfbd(A-mod) is a Serre functor.
Remark 2.11. Notice that we had to restrict ourselves to finite dimensional modules and the reason is the appearance of the dual vector space which provides an equivalence of categories only for finite dimensional modules.
In order to extend the notion to more general categories, in particular to finitely generated modules over an algebra finite over its center, Bezrukavnikov and Kaledin propose the notion of relative Serre functor (see [BK04, §2.1]). Since we do not prove anything about relative Serre functors we prefer to defer this discussion to a later work.
12

2.3 Central extensions
Let G = G(F ) be the locally compact group of F -rational points of a reductive linear algebraic group G over a non-archimedean local field F . Let G be a finite central extension of G with kernel a finite abelian group µ:
1µGG1
that is moreover a topological covering. In this situation it is proved, for example in [BJ, Lemma 2.2], that G admits a basis around identity of compact open subgroups lifted from G. So G is a totally disconnected group or an l-group in the terminology of [Ber92].
2.4 Representations
In this section we recall some notions around the representation theory of locally compact totally disconnected groups G. All representations will be on complex vector spaces. One can consult [Ber92, Ren10] for details. We will work with the category M(G) of smooth complex representations of such a group G.
Let H  G be a closed subgroup of G. Then restricting a representation from G to H we obtain an exact functor between the categories of smooth representations
ResGH : M(G)  M(H).
The restriction functor has a right adjoint given by induction
IndGH : M(H)  M(G)
IndGH(V ) := {f : G  V | f (hg) = hf (g), for all h  H and g  G}sm. The pair of adjoint functors ResGH IndGH goes under the name of Frobenius reciprocity. For details, one can look at [Ber92] or [Ren10, III.2.5]. The induction functor admits a subfunctor indGH  IndGH called compact induction consisting of functions with compact support modulo H:
indGH(V ) := {f  IndGH(V ) | H\ supp(f ) is compact}.
In case G/H is compact we clearly have indGH = IndGH. Definition 2.12. If V is a smooth representation of G then the contragredient representation of V is defined to be the smooth part of the linear dual V  := (V )sm.
One can prove (see [Ren10, III.2.7]) that induction and compact induction are related to each other through the contragredient. More precisely, for V a smooth representation of H we have
IndGH (V ) = indGH (V  H\G), where H\G is the modular character of G divided by the one of H.
Suppose now that H  G is open. Since H is the complement of the union of all non-trivial left cosets Hg, g  G, it is also a closed subgroup.
13

Lemma 2.13. (see [Ren10, III.2.6.5]) If H  G is an open subgroup then the restriction functor ResGH is right adjoint to the compact-induction functor indGH. In particular, indGH sends projective objects to projective objects.

2.5 Projectives and injectives
We continue with G being a locally compact, totally disconnected group. Let M(G) be the abelian category of smooth representations of G. Let H(G) be the Hecke algebra of locally constant compactly supported functions on G endowed with convolution (one needs to choose a left invariant Haar measure on G). The algebra H(G) is an algebra without unit but with a rich supply of idempotents4 because G has a basis of neighborhoods of identity consisting of open compact subgroups. A representation V of H(G) is said to be nondegenerate if it has the property that H(G)V = V . There is the well-known equivalence of the category of smooth representations of G and non-degenerate representations of H(G):
M(G) H(G)-modnd.

Remark 2.14. Suppose that G admits a countable basis of neighborhoods of identity

consisting of compact open subgroups. Then the Hecke algebra H(G) is a projective

object in M(G). Indeed, one writes H(G) =

 i=1

H(G)ei

where

ei

=

eKi

are

idem-

potents corresponding to a countable basis of compact open subgroups of G. Since

HomG(H(G)ei, V ) = V Ki, each of the H(G)ei is a projective object in M(G), and then

one notices that HomG(H(G), -) = limi HomG(H(G)ei, -) and this latter inverse limit

is exact because the transition functions are surjective (and hence the Mittag-Leffler

condition is automatically satisfied).

The abelian category M(G) has a good supply of injective and projective objects, for example for any open compact subgroup K of G, indGK(C) is a projective object (see Lemma 2.13), and its smooth dual IndGK(C) is an injective object.
We use ExtiG(V, V ) to denote Ext groups in M(G).

2.6 Homological dimension
Here G = G(F ) and G is a central extension of G as defined in Section 2.3.
It is shown in [Ber92, Theorem 29] that the category of smooth representations of G has finite homological dimension. The argument uses the building of G to give a resolution of the trivial module by projective modules which are sums of representations of G of the form indGK(C) (where K are compact open subgroups of G):
0  Pd  · · ·  P1  P0  C  0,
where d is the split rank of G. Tensoring this resolution with any G-module V , and observing that
indGK(C)  V = indGK(V |K),
4It is what is called an idempotented algebra: for every finite set of element ai, there is an idempotent e such that eai = aie = ai for each ai.
14

we find a projective resolution of length  d for any G-module V . This argument with the resolution of the trivial module C for G works just as well for covering groups G  G. Therefore, ExtiG(V, V ) = 0 for any representations V, V of G, if i > d. Since the category of representations is noetherian and, as we have seen, of finite homological dimension, any finitely generated module admits a finite resolution by finitely generated projective modules. (If d is the projective dimension of a finitely generated representation V , resolve V by finitely generated projective modules Pd-1  · · ·  P1  P0  V  0, and then observe as in the proof of Hilbert Syzygy that the kernel of the map Pd-1  Pd-2 must be projective.) This will be useful when we apply the abstract results from Section 9 to representation theory in Section 10 and Section 11 as all finitely generated modules will be perfect.
3 Splitting the category of representations
3.1 Compact representations
In this section G denotes an arbitrary locally compact td-group which is countable at infinity. The most important result we need is that compact representations split the category of smooth representations of G.
Definition 3.1. A smooth representation (, V ) of G is said to be compact if all its matrix coefficients have compact support.
Remark 3.2. The existence of a compact irreducible representation implies that G has compact center.
We denote by M(G)c the full subcategory of M(G) consisting of representations whose irreducible subquotients are compact representations. It is clearly a subcategory closed under subquotients, direct sums and extensions.
We denote by M(G)nc the full subcategory of M(G) formed of representations that have no compact irreducible subquotient.
For S, a collection of irreducible representations of G, we denote by M(G)[S] the subcategory of M(G) formed of representations such that all their irreducible subquotients are isomorphic to an object in S. Denote by M(G)[out S] the subcategory of representations such that none of their irreducible subquotients are isomorphic to an object in S.
The first important theorem about compact representations is
Theorem 3.3. Let  be a compact irreducible representation of G. Then matrix coefficients of  provide us with an injective map of G × G-modules
   H(G),
and this is the only subquotient of H(G) isomorphic to  .
Moreover, if  is another irreducible compact representation of G, non-isomorphic to , then the G × G representation    does not appear as a subquotient of H(G).
15

The following theorem summarizes the main properties of compact representations:
Theorem 3.4 (see [Ren10, IV.1.3]). For S, a finite collection of compact irreducible representations of G, we have:
1. The category M(G)[S] is semisimple: all the objects in M(G)[S] are isomorphic to a direct sum of objects in S.
2. There is an equivalence of categories

M(G) M(G)[S] × M(G)[out S].

(3.1)

Moreover, the category M(G)c admits a decomposition

M(G)c = M(G)[]


(3.2)

where the product runs over all isomorphism classes of compact irreducible representations of G. In particular, M(G)c is a semisimple category.
It is natural to ask if we can always decompose a representation into a direct sum of compact and non-compact. This is not completely automatic and one needs a further finiteness condition:

Consider the following condition (see [Ren10, IV.1.7 (KF)]) called "compact finite":

for any compact open subgroup K  G there is only a finite number of isomorphism classes of compact irreducible representations of G having a non-zero K-fixed vector.

(KF)

Theorem 3.5. If the group G satisfies the above condition (KF), then we have a decomposition of categories

M(G) = M(G)c × M(G)nc.

(3.3)

Remark 3.6. Notice that in light of the theorem 3.5, every compact representation is projective-injective in M(G). This is a remarkably strong homological property that will be useful in the sequel.
In our situation, the condition (KF) is satisfied thanks to the uniform admissibility theorem, see Theorem 5.4.

3.2 Compact modulo center
We have seen that compact representations behave as nicely as one could hope but for many interesting groups there are no such representations. It turns out that the issue comes from the non-compactness of the center. In this subsection we present an analogue of the decomposition of categories Theorem 3.4 and Theorem 3.5.
Definition 3.7. A representation of G is called compact modulo center if its matrix coefficients have compact support modulo Z(G).
16

Denote by G the subgroup of G generated by all compact subgroups of G. If G = G(F ), for G a reductive group over F , one can define G algebraically too: it is the kernel of all || : G  R+ where  : G  F × are the algebraic characters of G defined over F . The subgroup G of G has the property that G/G Zd for some d  0. Further, GZ(G) is a normal subgroup of finite index in G.
We put X (G) := Homgr(G/G, C×) and call it the group of unramified characters of G.
Remark 3.8. A representation  of G is compact modulo center if and only if its restriction |G is compact.
The following well-known proposition, although simple, is the main ingredient allowing one to pass from G to G:
Proposition 3.9. [Ren10, VI.3.2]
1. Let (V, ) be an irreducible representation of G. The irreducible representations of G appearing in ResGG() are all conjugate under G. Moreover, the representation ResGG() is semisimple and of finite length.
2. Let (Vi, i) be two irreducible representations of G. The following are equivalent (a) ResGG(1) ResGG(2), (b) there exists an unramified character   X (G) such that
1   2,
(c) HomG(ResGG(1), ResGG(2)) = 0. We denote by M(G)sc, the full subcategory of M(G) formed of those representations all of whose subquotients are compact modulo center. The set of irreducible objects of M(G)sc is denoted by Irr(G)sc.
Definition 3.10. We say that two irreducible representations 1, 2  Irr(G)sc are in the same inertia class if there exists a character   X (G) such that 1 2. We write the corresponding equivalence relation as 1  2, and denote the inertia class containing   Irr(G)sc by the square bracket []. We denote the set of inertia classes in Irr(G)sc by [Irr(G)sc].
Given   Irr(G)sc, we denote by M(G)[], the full subcategory of M(G) consisting of representations whose restriction to G have all the irreducible subquotients among those of |G (a finite set of compact representations of G).
Remark 3.11. Proposition 3.9 says that two irreducible representations of G are in the same inertia class if and only if their restriction to G are isomorphic. Therefore the objects of the category M(G)[] are those smooth representations of G all of whose irreducible subquotients are in the same inertia class as .
Using the above proposition and Theorem 3.4, one immediately deduces:
17

Theorem 3.12. For an irreducible cuspidal representation  of G, we have a decomposition of the category M(G) as

M(G) M(G)[] × M(G)[out ].

Morever, the category M(G)sc decomposes as

M(G)sc =

M(G)[].

[]Irr(G)sc

The full subcategory of M(G) formed of those representations that have no irreducible subquotient that is compact modulo center is denoted by M(G)ind. Using Proposition 3.9 and Theorem 3.5 one deduces easily:
Theorem 3.13. If the group G satisfies condition (KF) then we have a decomposition of categories
M(G) = M(G)sc × M(G)ind.

3.3 The simplest Bernstein component
The goal of this subsection is to formulate and prove an analogue of Theorem 3.3
Fix   M(G) an irreducible, compact modulo center representation of G. Then    M(G × G) is irreducible and compact modulo center. We consider the Hecke algebra H(G) = indG×GG C as a G × G-module and we try to understand the part of H(G), denoted by H(G)[ ], that lives in M(G × G)[ ] (see Theorem 3.12).
Let us fix 0   |G, an irreducible representation of G. Put G1 = {g  G | 0 g0}  G. It is a normal subgroup of G and it contains the finite index subgroup GZ(G). Denote by  the group G/G1 and its order by f .
Put H := (G)(G × G)  G × G. The following is the main result of this subsection:
Proposition 3.14. For   M(G) an irreducible, compact modulo center representation of G we have an isomorphism of G × G representations

Further,

H(G)[ ] indG×(GG1)(G×G)(0 0).

(3.4)

( )  indHG×G C

HomG(|G, |G)  H(G)[ ] e2f H(G)[ ],

(3.5)

where HomG(|G, |G) is a finite dimensional representation of G/G, treated as a representation of G × G trivial on H = (G)(G × G)  G × G.

Proof. Put S = { |    |G×G irreducible}. The set S is a finite set of compact irreducible representations of G × G and given Theorem 3.4 we can write

H(G)|G×G = H(G)[S]  H(G)[out S]

18

as G × G-representations. Moreover, since S is stable under conjugation by G × G, the above decomposition holds as G × G-modules. Let us write H(G)[ ] for the G × G representation H(G)[S].
For   , let  := 0  , an irreducible sub G-representation of |G. Notice that  is isomorphic to the conjugated representation 0 where the action on 0 is conjugated by . The irreducible summands of |G are isomorphic to  for some    and   if  =  . Let's write the restriction of  to G as (for an integer e  1):
|G = e.


For an irreducible representation  of G, the finite set of unramified characters  : G/G  C× with   is a finite abelian group, call it X(). Then, the space HomG(|G, |G) comes equipped with an action of the abelian group G/G, diagonalizing which gives a canonical basis (up to scalars) which are nothing but the intertwining operators    , thus one sees that dim HomG(|G, |G) = e2f is the number of the intertwining operators   , and HomG(|G, |G) comes equipped with a basis e such that g ·e = (g)e.
The G-representation 0 does not extend to a representation of G1 but the (G × G)representation 0 0 does extend to a representation of (G1)(G × G): this is most easily seen by noticing that 0 extends to a projective representation of G1, and therefore 0 0 is canonically a representation of (G1), hence of (G1)(G × G). The representations   are also representations of (G1)(G × G) as they can be written as (,  )0 0.
In what follows, let  be the irreducible representation of H = (G)(G × G),

=

  = indH(G1)(G×G)(0 0).



By induction in stages: G × G  (G)(G × G)  (G), we can write:
H(G) = indG×(GG) C = indGH×G H(G),
as a representation of G × G, where we recall that H = (G)(G × G)  G × G is a normal subgroup of G × G with a natural action on H(G) (where (G) acts on G by the conjugation action, and G × G acts on G by left and right translations). Since the set S is stable under conjugation by G × G, we deduce the following
H(G)[ ] = indGH×G(H(G)[S]).

Theorem 3.3 tells us that in M(G × G), we have a natural isomorphism

H(G)[S]

  ind((GG)1()G(G××GG))(0 0),



which is moreover an isomorphism of H-modules, proving the isomorphism (3.4).

19

All the irreducible subrepresentations of  |H are of the form (, 1) (,1) , hence

 |H = e2(, 1).


(3.6)

Put these together and use the Mackey's relation V  indGK W = indGK(V |K  W ) to get
( )  indGH×G(C) indGH×G( |H ) e2f indGH×G( ) e2f indG×(GG1)(G×G)(0 0) HomG (|G , |G )  indG×(GG1)(G×G)(0 0) HomG(|G, |G)  H(G)[ ],

where in the 2nd isomorphism above, we have used (3.6) together with the fact that H is a normal subgroup of G × G, and indGH×G( ) = indGH×G( (,1)) for all   ; the last isomorphism is the isomorphism (3.4), and the isomorphism previous to that follows since
HomG(|G, |G) consists of characters of G/G, treated as a character of G × G trivial on (G)(G × G). Thus we have proved the isomorphism (3.5).

Remark 3.15. The isomorphism (3.5) of the above Proposition can be interpreted as saying that for the cuspidal representation   of G × G, the corresponding Bernstein component in H(G) "contains" all representations () () where  runs over all the unramified characters of G/G. Since     for e2f many characters, this number shows up as multiplicity in the right hand side of (3.5). This means that for each irreducible cuspidal representation  of G,   "appears" in H(G) with multiplicity 1, where the precise meaning of "appears" is to be understood in the derived sense, see Proposition 3.21.
Remark 3.16. Suppose the group G is either a reductive p-adic group, or a finite cover of it. Then for a standard parabolic P = LN inside G, and any cuspidal pair [L, ] defining a Bernstein block s (see Section 6), similar to Proposition 3.14, it is natural to propose the following isomorphism in M(G × G)
indGP ××PG-(   indL×(LL)(Lo×Lo)(C)) e2f wH(G)[s × s],
where e, f are defined as before for the cuspidal representation  of L, and w is the order of NG(L, [])/L where NG(L, []) is the normalizer of L preserving  up to an unramified character. This will be a kind of Plancherel decomposition in the smooth category, see [Hei04] for some results in this direction.
The following corollary is a consequence of the proof of the above proposition.
Corollary 3.17. The component of H(G) in M(G)[1 2] is zero unless 2 1 for some unramified character  of G.
Remark 3.18. In the language of Bernstein decomposition reviewed in Section 6, this is equivalent to saying that the Bernstein component of H(G) corresponding to 1 2 is zero unless 2 1 for some unramified character  of G.

20

We note the following corollary that will be useful to us in Section 8 when studying contragredients. It also appears in [AS00, Lemma B.5]
Corollary 3.19. For any irreducible representation   M(G), compact modulo center, we have an isomorphism of G-modules

HomG(indGG(|G), H(G)) indGG(|G).

Proof. By the Mackey theory, since (G × G)H = G × G, it follows that the restriction of indGH×G(C) to G × G is C  indGG C. Hence by the isomorphism (3.5), and Frobenius reciprocity:

e2f HomG(indGG(|G), H(G))

e2f HomG(indGG(|G), H(G)[ ]) HomG(indGG(|G),     indGH×G(C)) HomG(|G, |G  (  indGG C) HomG(|G, |G)  (  indGG C) e2f indGG(|G),

where in the 4th isomorphism we have used the following lemma.

Lemma 3.20. Let H1 (resp., H2) be a totally disconnected group, and 1 (resp., 2) any smooth representation of H1 (resp., H2). If 1 has finite length, then
HomH1(1, 1  2) HomH1(1, 1)  2
as representations of H2.

The following proposition, based on Proposition 3.14, seems worth including as its proof is fairly elementary. However, a generalization to finite length plus functoriality is proved in Corollary 12.25. Recall that G/G Zd for some integer d  0.
Proposition 3.21. Let  be an irreducible, compact modulo center representation of G. Then RHom·G(, H(G)), lives only in degree d where it is isomorphic to .
Proof. By Proposition 3.14, the proof of this proposition boils down to proving that RHom·G(,    indGH×G(C)) lives only in degree d and
ExtdG(,    indGH×G(C)) = (e2f ).
For any two modules M, N of G × G which are semisimple when restricted to G sitting in the first copy of G, i.e. G × 1  G × G, it is well known that
ExtiG[M, N ] = Hi(G/G, HomG[M, N ]),
where the groups G, G are in G × 1  G × G, and both Exti and Hi here are modules for 1 × G  G × G. We apply this to M =  (treated as a module for G × G on which
21

1 × G acts trivially), and N =    indGH×G(C). Note that indGH×G(C) restricted to G is indGG(C) as representation space for 1 × G  G × G. Thus, N restricted to G × G  G × G is |G    indGG(C); further, the actions of G/G and 1 × G coincide on indGG(C). Thus
HomG[,     indGH×G(C)]) = HomG[, ]    indGG(C),
therefore Hi(G/G, HomG[M, N ]) = Hi(G/G, HomG[, ]  indGG(C))  .
Now we know that HomG[, ] is a representation of G/G of dimension e2f , therefore, HomG[, ]  indGG(C) e2f indGG(C),
both as a module for G × 1 and 1 × G. Hence we are reduced to understanding Hi(Zd, C[Zd]) which is well-known to be zero for i < d, and Hd(Zd, C[Zd]) = ExtdZd(C, C[Zd]) C, completing the proof of the Proposition.
Remark 3.22. Later, in Corollary 12.25, we will prove that Proposition 3.21 remains true for any finite length cuspidal representation of a p-adic group or of a finite cover of it. We take this occasion to mention that the Bernstein block even of a cuspidal representation is not totally trivial: although it is true that a finite length indecomposable cuspidal representation of G is the successive extension of a fixed irreducible cuspidal representation  of G, it is not true that such a finite length indecomposable cuspidal representation of G is of the form    where  is an irreducible cuspidal representation of G, and  is a finite dimensional indecomposable representation of G/G (which is the case when |G is irreducible, in which case, indeed this Bernstein block is rather simple).
4 Basic notions of representation theory
We place ourselves in the setting G = G(F ) for G a reductive group over a non-archimedean local field F and G a covering group of G (see Section 2.3). All the basic notions for linear groups have an analogue for the covering group G  G.
4.1 Parabolics, Levi and the Weyl group
A parabolic subgroup for G is simply the preimage of a parabolic subgroup of G. Similarly for Levi subgroups. A Levi decomposition P = LN for P  G lifts to a Levi decomposition P = LN where N  G is the unique lift of N to G that is normalized by L (in characteristic zero such a lift is obvious, in general see [MW94, Appendix Lemma]). For P a parabolic subgroup of G with Levi decomposition LN we denote by P - the opposite parabolic with Levi decomposition LN -. Similarly for their preimages in G. If T is a maximal torus of G then we denote by T its preimage5 in G and the Weyl group of G is defined simply to be equal to W , the Weyl group of G. We have W = NG(T )/T .
5Notice that T is not necessarily abelian but this is immaterial to us.
22

4.2 Parabolic induction and restriction

The notion of parabolic restriction (Jacquet modules), and parabolic induction, make sense for G, and they have the same adjointness properties as in the linear case.

Let P = LN be a parabolic with a Levi decomposition. The (normalized) functors of parabolic induction and parabolic restriction are defined as follows (for details see [Ren10, VI.1]):

iG : M(L)  M(G)
L,P





indGP (



-1/2) P

rG : M(G)  M(L) L,P

  (ResGP ( )  P1/2)N

where (-)N is the functor of coinvariants under N and P : P  R×+ is the modular character of P . Both functors are exact.

Frobenius reciprocity states that iG is right adjoint to rG . As a consequence, parabolic

L,P

L,P

induction preserves limits and parabolic restriction preserves colimits.

It is easy to establish that parabolic induction preserves admissibility (see [Ren10, III.2.3]): this is because the double-coset K\G/P is finite for any open compact K  G.

We define cuspidal representations of G just as in the linear case: those smooth representations of G whose all nontrivial parabolic restrictions vanish (i.e., all Jacquet modules vanish).

By the same arguments as in the linear case (see [Ren10, VI.5.1]), the geometric lemma holds and allows one to calculate the Jordan­Hölder series of Jacquet module of a principal series representation of G. Then one can conclude as in the linear case that every irreducible representation of G is a subquotient of a principal series representation of G induced from a cuspidal representation of a Levi subgroup of G.

4.3 Iwahori decomposition

Definition 4.1. A compact open subgroup K of G (or of G) is said to have an Iwahori factorization with respect to a parabolic P = LN with opposite parabolic P - = LN - if the natural map given by multiplication:
m : K+ × K0 × K-  K,

is a bijection, where

K+ = K  N, K0 = K  L, K- = K  N-.

For central extensions G, we replace P = LN with P = LN and P - = LN - and everything makes sense to define Iwahori factorization in G.

23

4.4 Cartan decomposition
The Cartan decomposition for the group G plays an important role in the proof of the uniform admissibility theorem. The analogous theorem for G is proved by taking inverse image from G. Let us recall some notions before we state the theorem.
Recall from Section 3.2 that G is the subgroup of G generated by all compact subgroups. It is the preimage of the similarly defined subgroup G  G. We put (G) := G/G = G/G; it is a finite rank free Z-module.
Definition 4.2. The set of unramified characters of G is defined to be
X (G) := Hom(G/G, C×) = Hom(G/G, C×).

It is clear that the image of Z(G) has finite index in G/G and hence the rank of Z(G) is the same as the rank of Z(G). In other words, we have X (G) (C×)dG where dG is the split rank of Z(G). Notice that by definition, the unramified characters of G are the same as those of G (identified through the map G  G).
Construction. For L, a reductive group over F , we denote by AL, the maximal split torus contained in the center of L, and denote d(L) := dim(AL), and call it the split rank of the center of L. We extend this definition to any finite central extension L of L(F ), defining d(L) = d(L) = dim(AL).
Put A := AL(F ) and notice that the image of A/A  L/L has finite index. Moreover, the surjection A  A/A admits a section that is a group homomorphism (use a uniformizer in F ) and so we get an injection A/A  L whose image in L/L has finite index.
If L is a finite central extension of L, then the natural map Z(L)  Z(L) induces a map of lattices (Z(L))  (Z(L)) whose image has finite index. We can therefore find a lift (Z(L))  L that is a group homomorphism and moreover its image in (L) = (L) has finite index. Summarizing we have a diagram

LO

/ (OL) = / (OL)

?
Z (L)

/

?
(Z

(L))



/

?
(Z

(L))

and from the discussion above we have a section (Z(L))  Z(L) which is a group homomorphism. Denote its image by CA; it is a central subgroup of L.
Fix also finitely many elements FA := {f1, . . . , fr  L} that lift some system of representatives for (L)/(Z(L)).
All in all, we have that CAFA provides a set-theoretic lift of (L) to L that is moreover a group homomorphism when restricted to (Z(L)).
Apply the above discussion to a parabolic subgroup P = LN and recall the notion of dominant cocharacters of L with respect to P . Let L+ denote the preimage of dominant cocharacters of L through the map L  Homgr(L, Gm) given by m  (  (m)). We

24

let L+ denote its preimage in L under L  L We can choose the above FA to lie in L+ and similarly we can consider CA+  CA the subset of dominant elements in CA. Let P0 be a fixed minimal parabolic subgroup of G with Levi decomposition P0 = L0N0 and denote by P0 = L0N0 the corresponding subgroups in G.
Let A = A0 be the split component of P0 and CAFA  L0 as above.
Theorem 4.3 (see [Ren10, V.5.1]). (Cartan decomposition) There exists a maximal compact subgroup K0 of G such that
1. G = P0K0 = K0P0
2. G = afCA+FA K0af K0.
Put H0 = H(K0, K) the Hecke algebra of K-biinvariant functions on K0. It is a finite dimensional algebra over C.
A rather easy consequence of this theorem, which is essential in the proof of the uniform admissibility theorem, is the following decomposition of the Hecke algebra:
Theorem 4.4. Let K  G be a compact open subgroup of G. Then the Hecke algebra H(G, K) decomposes as
H(G, K) = H0DCH0
where D is a vector subspace spanned by functions indexed by FA and C is a subalgebra isomorphic to the group algebra of CA (Z(L0)).
5 Basic theorems
As before, G is a covering group (see Section 2.3) of a reductive p-adic group G, where G = G(F ) for G a reductive group over F , a non-archimedean local field. All the basic theorems concerning representations of reductive p-adic groups hold also for G with the same proofs. We will give precise references to [Ren10] where the analogous results for G are proved.
The groups G and G do not have any compact representations in general because their centers may be non-compact. However, we can ask for the next best thing (see Section 3.2):
Definition 5.1. A representation (V, )  M(G) is called compact modulo center if all its matrix coefficients have compact support in G/Z(G).
The classical theorem of Harish-Chandra still holds with the same proof:
Theorem 5.2 (Harish-Chandra, see [Ren10, VI.2.1] for linear groups). A representation (, V ) of G is cuspidal if and only if it is compact modulo center.
Using the easy fact that parabolic induction preserves admissibility we obtain as a consequence the admissibility of irreducible representations (for a proof in the linear case see for example [Ren10, VI.2.2] or [Ber92, Theorem 12]):
Theorem 5.3. Any irreducible representation of G is admissible.
25

Not only irreducible representations are admissible but in fact they are so in a uniform way. Below is the precise formulation of the Uniform Admissibility Theorem due to Bernstein whose proof is based on the decomposition of the bi-invariant Hecke algebra given in Theorem 4.4 and some tricky linear algebra:
Theorem 5.4 (uniform admissibility, [Ber74]). Let K  G be an open compact subgroup. There exists a constant c = c(K) such that for all irreducible representations (, V ) of G we have dim(V K)  c.
One can also look at [Ren10, VI.2.3] for a proof.
For establishing the Bernstein decomposition, and prior to that, verifying the condition (KF) which leads to Theorem 3.5, one makes use of the following
Corollary 5.5 (see [Ren10, VI.2.4] for the linear case). Given an open compact subgroup K  G there is a compact modulo center subset   G such that for any irreducible cuspidal representation (V, ) of G and any vector v  V K the function

has support contained in .

g  eK · (g)(v)

6 The Bernstein decomposition
We give an exposition of a small part of a theory due to Bernstein which allows one to decompose the category M(G) of smooth complex representations of G as a direct product of certain indecomposable full subcategories, now called the Bernstein components of M(G). The results are due to [Ber84] where it is also stated that they hold for finite central extensions of reductive p-adic groups. Indeed, no essential modifications are needed to adapt the proof from [Ber84] to the case of finite central extensions. However, in the following we follow mostly the exposition of the linear case from [Ren10, VI.7] and we give precise references.
The idea is that whereas G does not have compact representations, the group G does and moreover from Harish-Chandra's Theorem 5.2 all irreducible cuspidal representations of G restrict to compact representations of G. So using the results of Section 3.2, we can decompose M(G) into a cuspidal part and an induced part. Using induction we express the induced part in a similar way.
6.1 Cuspidals split
In this section we sketch the decomposition of M(G) into a product of cuspidal and induced.
We define M(G)sc (resp., M(G)ind) to be the full subcategory of M(G) formed of representations all of whose irreducible subquotients are cuspidal (resp., that have no cuspidal irreducible subquotients). The set Irrsc(G) denotes the set of irreducible cuspidal representations of G.

26

Remark 6.1. The category M(G)sc (resp., M(G)ind) is the pullback of the subcategory of compact representations (resp., non-compact representations) from M(G) through the functor ResGG.
Let (V, )  Irrsc(G) and denote by [] its inertia class, i.e., its orbit under X (G). From Proposition 3.9 we have that the restriction of  to G depends only on the inertia class and we know moreover that this restriction has finite length and is semisimple.
Definition 6.2. We define M(G)[] to be the full subcategory of M(G) formed of those representations all of whose subquotients belong to []. Similarly define M(G)[out ].
Remark 6.3. Here is a different way of thinking about M(G)[]. If 1, 2, . . . , l are the irreducible summands of  restricted to G, then the category M(G)[] consists precisely in the representations of G whose restriction to G are direct sums of i, i = 1, . . . , l, i.e., those representations of G whose restriction to G belongs to M(G)[A], where A = {i | i = 1, . . . , l}. (See Section 3.1.)
Harish-Chandra's Theorem 5.2 together with the results from Section 3.2 give
Theorem 6.4. For an irreducible cuspidal representation  of G, we have a decomposition of the category M(G) as
M(G) M(G)[] × M(G)[out ].

One uses the uniform admissibility Theorem 5.4 to check the condition (KF) in Section 3.1 and then applies Theorem 3.12 and Theorem 3.13 to get the following decomposition

Theorem 6.5 (see [Ren10, VI.3.5]). The subcategories M(G)sc and M(G)ind split the category M(G):

M(G) = M(G)sc × M(G)ind

(6.1)

and moreover the cuspidal part decomposes as

M(G)sc =

M(G)[].

[][Irr(G)sc]

(6.2)

Since the center of a product of categories is the product of their centers (see Proposition 2.5), we have

Corollary 6.6.

Z(M(G)) =

Z[] × Z(M(G)ind).

[][Irrsc(G)]

It turns out that for an irreducible cuspidal representation  the center Z[] of M(G)[] is not very hard to determine. Recall the notation (G) = G/G and X (G) = Homgr((G), C×) and notice that the group algebra C[(G)] is the algebra of regular functions on the algebraic variety (a torus) X (G).
We first need a lemma whose easy proof goes through considerations of the effect on the central character.

27

Lemma 6.7. [Ren10, V.2.7] Given   Irrsc(G) its stabilizer in X (G) is finite. Let us put G := StabX (G)() the stabilizer of  in the group X (G). Theorem 6.8 (see [Ren10, VI.10] or [Ber84, 1.12-1.14] for a slick proof). We have a canonical isomorphism
Z(M(G)[]) C[(G)]G = O(X (G)/G).
In particular, Z(M(G)[]) is isomorphic to a ring of Laurent polynomials and hence is smooth of Krull dimension equal to the the rank of (G). Actually, one can do a bit better and find an equivalence of categories M(G)[] mod-R[] with R[] := EndG([]) and [] := indGG(ResGG()). This will be discussed in Section 8.
6.2 Induced representations
In this section we look at the category M(G)ind and decompose it into blocks. The main input is the geometric lemma (see [Ren10, VI.5.1] for a proof that works also for G). Definition 6.9.
1. A cuspidal datum is a couple (L, ) where L is a Levi subgroup of G and   Irr(L)sc is an irreducible cuspidal representation of L.
2. We say that two cuspidal data (L, ), (M ,  ) are conjugate (or associate) if there exists g  G such that
L = gM and  = g,
3. We say that two cuspidal data (L, ), (M ,  ) define the same inertial support if there exists g  G and   X (L) such that
L = gM and  = g .
We denote by (G) the set of cuspidal data up to conjugation and by B(G) the cuspidal data up to conjugation and inertia. The following theorem is extensively used and it goes under the name of «the geometric lemma»". It i due to Bernstein and Zelevinsky [BZ76, 2.12]. Theorem 6.10 (see [Ren10, VI.5.3]). Let P = M N and Q = LU be two parabolic subgroups of G with Levi decompositions. Let  be an irreducible cuspidal representation of M and put  := rG iG (). Then we have
L,Q M ,P
1. If L has no Levi subgroup conjugate to M , then  = 0. 2. If M is not conjugate to L, then  has no cuspidal subquotient.
3. If M and L are standard and conjugate, then  has a filtration with subquotients isomorphic to w for w  W (L, M )/WL. In particular,  is cuspidal.
28

In the above statement WL is the Weyl group of L and W (L, M ) is the subset of the Weyl group of G conjugating L into M .

The next result, proved using the above theorem, shows that the Jordan­Hölder factors of an induced representation of an irreducible cuspidal are independent of the chosen parabolic and depend only on the conjugation class of the cuspidal datum.

Theorem 6.11 (see [Ren10, VI.5.4]). Let P = LN an P = L N be two parabolic

subgroups

with

Levi

decompositions.

Let

  Irrsc(L)

and



 Irrsc(L )sc

and

 = iG ) L,P

and  = iG ( ) for the induced representations. The following are equivalent L ,P

1. The cuspidal data (L, ) and (L ,  ) are conjugated,

2. The Jordan­Hölder series of  and  are equivalent,

3. The Jordan­Hölder series of  and  have a common element.

In particular, if L = L and  =  this shows that  and  have the same Jordan­Hölder series, independent of the chosen parabolic.

The previous theorem guarantees that the following notion is well defined.

Definition 6.12. Let   M(G) be an irreducible representation. We define its cuspidal support to be a cuspidal datum up to conjugation (L, )  (G) such that  appears in the Jordan­Hölder series of the parabolic induction iG () for some parabolic with Levi
L,P
decomposition P = LN .

Remark 6.13. In order to decompose M(G)ind we would like to pull back, for each cuspidal datum up to conjugation (L, )  (G), the decomposition from (6.1) for L back to G for each irreducible cuspidal representation of L. However, we need to take into account also the inertia because M(L)[] is an indecomposable subcategory.

Recall the set B(G) of cuspidal data up to conjugation and inertia. For (L, ) a cuspidal datum we denote by [L, ]G its class in B(G). If no confusion can arise, we drop the subscript G.

Given [L, ]  B(G), Theorem 6.11 allows us to define unambiguously the subcategory of representations of G all whose irreducible subquotients have cuspidal support in [L, ]:

M(G)[L,] =

  M(G)

all irreducible subquotients of  as a G-module have cuspidal support in [L, ]

.

(6.3)

The next lemma gives another characterization of the category M(G)[L,].

Lemma 6.14. Let [L, ]  B(G) and P = LN be a parabolic subgroup with Levi L.

Then the subcategory M(G)[L,] is the smallest full subcategory of M(G) closed under

subquotients

and

containing

iG
L,P

(M(L)[]).

Proof. It follows easily from Theorem 6.10 and Theorem 6.11.

29

Use Frobenius reciprocity, Theorem 6.10 and exactness of parabolic induction and restriction to deduce the following proposition.

Proposition 6.15. If [L, ], [L ,  ] are distinct elements of B(G), then the subcategories
M(G)[L,] and M(G)[L , ] are (derived) orthogonal, i.e., there are no non-zero Ext groups between them.

The above proposition together with Proposition 2.1 imply that we have a fully faithful

functor

M(G)s  M(G).

sB(G)

Proving that this functor is essentially surjective6 gives the Bernstein decomposition for M(G):

Theorem 6.16 (see [Ren10, VI.7.2]). The category of smooth representations of G decomposes into blocks indexed by B(G):

M(G) =

M(G)s.

sB(G)

(6.4)

Proof. Using Theorem 6.5 what is left to show is that every representation   M(G)ind can be written as a direct sum of representations s  M(G)s:

 sB(G)s for some s  M(G)s.

(6.5)

First one observes that (6.5) holds for an induced representation of a cuspidal representation from a Levi. This is tautological using Lemma 6.14.
Next one notices that if    is a subrepresentation and  satisfies (6.5) then the same is true of  . Namely, consider s = s   , then  = sB(G)s as follows easily only using the fact that no nonzero subquotients of s for different s are isomorphic (analogous assertion in group theory is called Goursat's Lemma).
Finally, one needs to show that every representation   M(G)ind can be embedded into a sum of induced representations. This is done using a pair of adjoint functors that are direct sums of all parabolic induction functors (resp., parabolic restriction) indexed by all the standard parabolic subgroups. For details, see [Ren10, VI.7.2 second Lemme].

7 Second adjointness theorem

Recall that the Frobenius reciprocity states that for P a parabolic subgroup with Levi

L the functor rG is left adjoint to iG . It is natural to look for an adjoint in the other

L,P

L,P

direction.

6A functor F : C  D is called essentially surjective if for any X  D there exists A  C such that F (A) X.

30

Although showing that iG admits a right adjoint is not difficult (see below), identifying L,P
precisely this adjoint is quite hard and is the content of Bernstein's second adjointness

theorem: iG is left adjoint to rG , where P - is the opposite parabolic of P .

L,P

L,P -

In this section we will sketch the main steps in the proof following the exposition in [Ren10, VI.9] where all the details are spelled out for linear groups. In loc.cit. the argument is streamlined using the notion of completion of a representations of G which we will recall below. Other references for the linear case include [Ber92, Theorem 19] and a geometric proof [BK15].

7.1 Completion
We recall the notion of completion for smooth G-modules where G is a locally compact, totally disconnected group admitting a countable basis of neighborhoods of 1 given by compact open subgroups. For V a smooth G-module its completion V is a G-module (not smooth anymore) sitting between V and (V ).
This notion will play a simplifying role in the proof of the second adjointness theorem and it also helps clarify the relationship between N -invariants and N -coinvariants.
Notice that for a representation V of G and compact open subgroups L  K with corresponding idempotents eK, eL  H(G) we have a natural map eLV  eKV sending w to eKw.
Definition 7.1. For V a smooth representation of G we define the functor
( ) : M(G)  RepC(G) by V := lim-(eKV ) = lim-(V K) where the inverse limit is taken over all compact open subgroups of G.
A few remarks are in order
Remark 7.2.
1. Since the set of compact open subgroups of G is invariant under conjugation by G, it follows that V is a G-module and that V K = V K. Clearly V  V and the smooth part of V is V .
2. The completion functor is exact because the Mittag-Leffler condition is automatically satisfied.
3. Another way of writing the completion functor is as
V = HomG(H(G), V )
and this is simply because H(G) = l-im H(G)eK. The exactness of the functor V  V is equivalent to H(G) being a projective G-module.
Proposition 7.3. For V , a smooth representation of G, we have
V  = V .
31

Proof. Suppose given B : V × W  C a pairing of smooth G-representations inducing an injective map of representation V  W . Since (W )K = (W K) for any smooth representation W of G and any compact open subgroup K  G, we obtain
V = lim-(V K)  lim-(W K) = (-lim W K) = W .
In particular, taking B : V  × V  C to be the natural pairing and using that (V )K = (V )K for all open compact subgroups K, we obtain the claimed equality.
Applying it to the standard bilinear form B : H(G) × H(G)  C, we find Corollary 7.4. The completion H(G) of H(G) is the space of distributions D on G such that eK  D is a compactly supported distribution on G for all idempotents eK. In particular, coupled with Proposition 2.6, we deduce: Corollary 7.5. The center of M(G) can be described as H(G)G, i.e., the space of invariant distributions D on G such that eK  D is a compactly supported distribution on G for all idempotents eK. Remark 7.6. It is known that for smooth representations taking invariants with respect to a unipotent subgroup N is not a well behaved functor and as such it is almost never used. On the other hand, taking coinvariants under N leads to nice exact functors (Jacquet functors) which are extremely important in the theory. The completion allows us to reconcile invariants and coinvariants for N provided we use completions. Proposition 7.7. The functor (-)N  (-)  (-) : M(G)  VectC is exact.
Proof. Notice that we have a natural isomorphism (V )N = (VN ) for any representation V of G. In particular, for a smooth representation V of G, using Proposition 7.3 we obtain
V N = (V )N = (VN ).
Taking N -coinvariants is an exact functor because N is a increasing union of compact open subgroups. So the functor (-)N  (-)  (-) identifies with the composition of two exact functors (-)  (-)N which concludes the proof.
In other words, taking N -invariants on completions of contragredient G-modules is an exact functor. In particular, we deduce Corollary 7.8. The functor (-)N  (-) is exact on admissible modules.
7.2 Adjoints
From now on, G is a reductive p-adic group and G is a finite covering group of it (see Section 2.3). We fix P = LN , a parabolic subgroup with a Levi decomposition in G, and we denote by P -, the opposite parabolic subgroup with Levi decomposition LN -. We denote by P , the modulus character of P .
32

The induction functor indG : M(P )  M(G) has a different, more algebraic, expression P
in terms of the Hecke algebras. First, recall that we have an equivalence of categories M(G) H(G)-modnd
between smooth representations of G and non-degenerate H(G)-modules and that this holds also for P and L. The following result gives a different incarnation of the induction from P to G: Proposition 7.9 ([Ren10, Théorème III.2.6]). There is a natural isomorphism of functors
H(G) H(P ) - indGP (- C P ).

Now consider the functor of taking G-smooth vectors (or the non-degenerate submodule for the Hecke algebra)
(-)nd-G : H(G)-mod  H(G)-modnd
which to a module associates its non-degenerate submodule. Similarly for H(P )-modules. Remark 7.10. The functor (-)nd-G is right adjoint to the inclusion functor
H(G)-modnd  H(G)-mod.

Proposition 7.11. The functor

indG P

(-

C

P ) :

M(P )



M(G)

is left adjoint to

(-)nd-P  ResGP (-) : M(G)  M(P ).

Proof. The usual tensor­Hom adjunction has the following analogue here: the functor

H(G) H(P ) - : M(P )  M(G)

is left adjoint to

(-)nd-P  HomH(G)(H(G), -) : M(G)  M(P )

where H(G) is viewed as a left H(G)-module and a right H(P )-module.

Therefore the functor HomH(G)(H(G), -) : M(G)  H(P )-mod is identified with ResGP (-).
Now we conclude using the fact that the image of a non-degenerate module is a nondegenerate module.

We immediately get some expression of the right adjoint of parabolic induction:

33

Corollary 7.12. The functor iG : M(L)  M(G) is left adjoint to L,P

(-)N  (-)nd-P  ResGP (-).

Proof. Use Remark 7.10 and that the right adjoint of the inflation functor ResLP : M(L)  M(P ) is (-)N .

The key in the proof of Bernstein's second adjointness is the generalized Jacquet Lemma which was proved first by Casselman for admissible representations and later generalized by Bernstein to all smooth representations. See [Ber92, p.65 Jacquet's Lemma], [Ren10, VI.9.1]. The same proof works for finite central extensions:
Theorem 7.13. Let K  G be an open compact admitting an Iwahori decomposition with respect to P = LN . Then for any representation V  M(G), the projection

V K  (VN )KL

is surjective and has a natural (functorial in V ) section, call it sK : (VN )KL  V K. Further, for K  K open compact, both admitting Iwahori decompositions with respect to P = LN , we have the commutative diagram (see [Ren10, VI.9.6.6]) :

s
(VN )K L K
e
KL
s
(VN )KL K

VK
e
K
V K.

Recall that for a G-module V , we defined its completion to be
V := HomG(H(G), V ) = lim V K K
where the limit is taken over all the open compact subgroups K of G. The previous theorem is actually equivalent to the following very nice looking statement that is proved for linear groups in [Ren10, VI.9.7]. The same proof works for finite central extensions. (The commutativity of the diagram in Theorem 7.13 allows one to construct a map VN  V which is then proved to land inside the space of N --invariants.) Corollary 7.14. If P = LN is a parabolic with opposite P - = LN - and V is a smooth representation of G then the natural map
V N-  VN
is an isomorphism of L-representations.

34

In representation theory of p-adic groups taking invariants is not a well behaved functor and one only works with co-invariants. In some sense, this corollary recovers the lost properties of invariants provided we are willing to work with completed representations.
Using Corollary 7.14 one can now prove Bernstein's second adjointness theorem easily (we follow the exposition in [Ren10, VI.9.7] for linear groups). Other references for the linear case are [Ber92, Theorem 19], [BK15].

Theorem 7.15. The functor iG is left adjoint to rG .

L,P

L,P -

Proof. We have the following natural isomorphisms:

HomG(iGL,P (V ), W ) = HomG(indGP ResLP (P1/2  V ), W )

= HomG(H(G) H(P ) ResLP (P-1/2  V ), W )

= HomP (ResLP (P-1/2  V ), W ) = HomL(P-1/2  V, W N ) = HomL(V, P1/2  WN-) = HomL(V, P1/2  WN-)

=

HomL(V,

rG L,P

-

(W

))

by definition
by Proposition 7.9
by Proposition 7.11 ResLP (-)N
by Corollary 7.14 by Remark 7.10 by definition.

Since every functor that admits an exact right adjoint preserves projective objects, we deduce the rather non-trivial fact: Corollary 7.16. The functor iG : M(L)  M(G) sends projective objects to projective
L,P
objects.
8 Blocks as module categories
In this section we describe each block M(G)s, s  B(G), as the category of modules over some algebra Rs and prove some basic homological properties of this algebra. The key results of this section are Corollary 8.6 and Proposition 8.7.
8.1 Cuspidals
Fix (L, ) a cuspidal data and denote by s  B(G) its equivalence class (conjugation and inertia). Define the following representation of L:
[] := indLL( |L) where we recall that L is the subgroup of L generated by all compact subgroups.
35

Proposition 8.1. The representation [] is a finite type projective generator in M(L)[].
Proof. First we show the projectivity. Since L  L is an open subgroup, the functor indLL is also left adjoint to ResLL (see Lemma 2.13) which is exact, hence indLL preserves projective objects. It is therefore enough to show that |L is projective which follows immediately from Harish-Chandra's Theorem 5.2 and the fact that compact representations are projective by Section 3.
Let us now show that [] is a generator of M(L)[]. Let  be an arbitrary representation in M(L)[]. We must show that there's a non-zero morphism []  . Recall (paragraph before Theorem 6.4) that the category M(L)[] is defined as consisting of those smooth representations of L all whose irreducible subquotients belong to []. Since [] is a projective representation of L, it is enough to prove that an irreducible representation belonging to M(L)[], thus isomorphic to  for some unramified character   X (L), appears as a quotient of []. By the adjunction Lemma 2.13, we have
HomL([], ) = HomL( |L,  |L),
and the latter is non-zero as it contains the identity.
In order to show that [] is of finite type, one notices that L\L is a discrete group and leads to a basis of indLL( |L) indexed by these cosets and a basis of . The action of L permutes this basis and hence, by choosing a finite generating set of  |L, we obtain a finite generating set of [] as an L-representation, proving that [] is of finite type.
We put R[] := EndL([]). Generalities from category theory (see Proposition 2.7), gives us the following corollary.
Corollary 8.2. We have an equivalence of categories
M(L)[] - mod-R[]   HomL([], ).
Below we give a description of the algebra R[] by generators and relations.
Recall that G  Homgr(, C×) = X (L) denotes the stabilizer of , where  = L/L, i.e., G = {  Homgr(, C×)|   }. The group G naturally acts on the complex torus X (L) by translations, and hence also on the algebra of regular functions on O(X (L)) = C[] := A which we denote by (f ) = f for   G. By Schur's lemma, the isomorphism   defines a unique map ­ up to scalars ­ from the space underlying  to itself, hence provides us with a 2-cocycle c  H2(G, C), which in turn defines a twisted group algebra C[G, c], the algebra generated by the intertwining operators from  to itself through the isomorphisms    .
Proposition 8.3 ([Ber92, Proposition 28]). The algebra R[] has the following presentation:
1. As a vector space R[] = A  C[G, c],
36

2. A and C[G, c] are subalgebras, 3. f b = bf for all f  A and   G, with b = 1    A  C[G, c] = R[].

Proof. The proof is fairly elementary but we will give a sketch. First notice that by adjunction, we have a natural isomorphism of vector spaces

R[] = EndL(indLL(|L)) EndL(|L)  A.

(8.1)

Since EndL(indLL(C)) = A, and since indLL(|L)   indLL(C), this exhibits A as a subalgebra of R[] and moreover it shows that (8.1) is an isomorphism of right A-modules.
Second, notice that  = L/L acts on EndL(|L) and the action factors through the finite quotient L/Z(L)L. Moreover the action is diagonalizable and the eigenvalues (i.e., characters of ) that appear are, by definition, exactly the elements of G. We deduce a canonical isomorphism of vector spaces
EndL(|L) C[G].
If b, bµ  EndL(|L) correspond to , µ  G through the previous isomorphism, then their product belongs to the eigenspace corresponding to µ, i.e., we have bbµ = c(, µ)bµ for some non-zero c(, µ)  C×. Associativity plus unity implies that c(-, -) is a two cocycle of G with values in C×. This allows us to construct a twisted group algebra C[G, c] and in turn provides us with an isomorphism of algebras
EndL(|L) C[G, c].
The last step consists in showing how the subalgebra A and C[G, c] interact inside R[]. This is done by writing down explicitly the isomorphism in (8.1).
Recall (see [Art99, Proposition III.12.1]) that an Azumaya algebra R over a ring Z is a Z-algebra such that for some faithfully flat extension of rings Z  Z we have R Z Z Mn(Z ). Equivalently, the multiplication map R Z Rop  EndZ(R) is an isomorphism of rings.
In particular, one deduces in a straightforward way from the above presentation of R[] the following:
Proposition 8.4. The natural inclusion AG  R[] identifies AG with the center Z(R[]). In particular Z(R[]) is isomorphic to a Laurent polynomial algebra. Moreover R[] is an Azumaya algebra over its center.
For a different proof, see [BH03, Proposition 8.1]. Note that our algebra R[] is a matrix algebra over the algebra EG of [BH03].
The next lemma is easy and is valid for any Azumaya algebra (see [Art99, Proposition IV.2.1])

37

Lemma 8.5. Let R be an Azumaya algebra over its center Z which is a noetherian ring. Then the trace map tr : R  Z provides an isomorphism of R-bimodules
R  HomZ(R, Z).
Proof. First, this is obvious for R = Mn(Z). Using faithfully-flat descent, one first defines the trace map unambiguously for any Azumaya algebra R and then sees that it provides a non-degenerate symmetric pairing R Z R  Z which leads to the isomorphism asserted in the statement of the lemma.
Applying this to our algebra R[] with center Z[] := Z(R[]), we get, in particular, the following corollary. Corollary 8.6. There is an isomorphism of R[]-bimodules
R[] HomZ[] (R[], Z[]).
Let us now apply what we have learned about R[] to showing the following proposition which plays a crucial role in the study of the homological duality functor (see Theorem 10.2). Proposition 8.7. Let V be an R[]-module which is finite dimensional over C. Then we have
ExtiR[](V, R[]) = 0 for all i = d().
Proof. For simplicity we will put R = R[] and Z := Z(R[]) in this proof. The forgetful functor
F : mod-R  mod-Z
can also be written as F = - R R where RRZ is viewed as an R-Z-bimodule. As such, F has a right adjoint F := HomZ(RZ, -). Since R is an Azumaya algebra (Proposition 8.4), it is a projective Z-module, hence both F and F are exact functors. It follows that the adjunction extends to Ext groups. Applying Corollary 8.6 we therefore get
ExtiR(V, R) = ExtiR(V, F (Z)) = ExtiZ (V, Z),
and now we conclude the proof of the proposition by a well-known result in commutative algebra since Z is a Laurent polynomial algebra (by Proposition 8.4) of Krull dimension d() and V is a Z-module which is a finite dimensional vector space over C.
Remark 8.8. The statement holds with the same proof if we only assume that R[] HomZ[](R[], Z[]) as right R[]-modules.
38

8.2 Non-cuspidal blocks: a projective generator

Moving on to the block in G corresponding to s = [L, ]  B(G), let us define the

representation

s

:=

P

iG
L,P

([]

)

=

P

iG
L,P

(indLL

(|L

))

where the sum ranges over all parabolics P with Levi L (it is a finite sum).

Remark

8.9.

Actually

it

would

be

enough

to

consider

iG
L,P

([])

for

a

single

parabolic

as this module turns out to be independent of the parabolic containing L. This is not so

easy to prove (see [Ren10, VI.10.1] for comments and proofs or [Ber92, p. 96]). We do not

need it though.

Lemma 8.10. The module s is a finite type projective-generator of M(G)s.

Proof. The projectivity follows at once as a consequence of the second-adjointness Corollary 7.16 together with Proposition 8.1: the functor iG has an exact right adjoint, hence
L,P
it preserves projectives and [] is projective. Since parabolic induction preserves finite type we have that s is also finitely generated.
Let   M(G)s be a non-zero representation of Gs. We need to show that HomG(s, ) is non zero and for that, since s is projective, it is enough to consider the case  irreducible. By definition of the block M(G)s, there exists a parabolic Q with Levi L such that rGL,Q-() is non-zero in the block M(L)[]. The second-adjointness Theorem 7.15 and the fact that [] is a generator of M(L)[] (see Proposition 8.1) imply that

HomG(iGL,Q([]), ) = HomL([], rGL,Q-()) = 0
and hence HomG(s, ) = 0.
An abelian category admitting all coproducts and having a finitely generated (compact) progenerator is equivalent to the category of right modules over its endomorphism ring (see Proposition 2.7). Putting Rs := EndG(s), we thus deduce the following proposition. Proposition 8.11. The functor

M(G)s  mod-Rs V  HomG(s, V )
is an equivalence of categories sending finite length representations of G in M(G)s to Rs-modules which are finite dimensional over C.

8.3 Center of M(G)s
This section plays no role in this work but we record it for completeness. We give the description of the center of the algebra Rs for s = [L, ]  B(G). In turn this determines the center of the block M(G)s (see Proposition 8.11, Remark 2.3 and Example 2.4).

39

Recall that X (L) acts on the irreducible cuspidals Irr(L)sc and we denoted by G the stabilizer of . Denote by W[] := StabW ([]), the stabilizer of the inertia class [] in
L,G
the relative Weyl group WL,G.
Recall also the Z-lattice (L) = L/L = (L) = L/L. The characters of (L) form a torus whose ring of regular functions is identified with the group algebra of (L):
C[(L)] = O(X (L)).
The linear case of the following theorem is due to [Ber84, 2.12] but the proof works also for finite central extensions. Another reference is [Ren10, VI.10.4].
Theorem 8.12. The algebra Rs contains the Laurent polynomial algebra O(X (L)/G) as a subalgebra and it is finite as a left (or right)-module over it. Moreover, the center of Rs is nothing but
Z(Rs) = O(X (L)/G)W[].
Since Z(Rs) has no non-trivial idempotents, we immediately get the following corollary.
Corollary 8.13. The category M(G)s is indecomposable.
9 An abstract duality theorem
The purpose of this section is to prove an abstract duality theorem reminiscent of the Serre functor property of the Nakayama functor RHomA(-, A) (see [BK89] and Section 2.2). This is achieved in Theorem 9.7 and Corollary 9.13. Although the results presented in this section are well-known and we do not claim any originality, for lack of a precise reference, we provide all the details. We do not strive for maximal generality, so sometimes we make hypotheses which might not be necessary but which hold in our applications to p-adic groups.
Let k be a field and A be an idempotented k-algebra, i.e., for every a  A there exists an idempotent e  A such that ae = ea = a. Clearly any unitary algebra is idempotented. We suppose moreover that A has a countable filtered set of idempotents. A left A-module M is said to be non-degenerate if AM = M , equivalently, if for any m  M , there exists an idempotent e  A such that em = m.
Remark 9.1. For a non-unitary ring, a free module is not necessarily projective. The basic projective left modules are Ae with e an idempotent. Any projective finitely generated non-degenerate A-module is a direct summand of iAei where {ei} is a finite collection of idempotents. This follows as in the unitary case using the fact that the module is non-degenerate and finitely generated. We denote by A-mod, the category of all left A-modules, and by A-modnd the full subcategory of non-degenerate left A-modules. We use similar notation for right Amodules.
40

Consider the functors HomA(-, -) : (A-modnd)op × A-modnd  Z-mod - A - : modnd-A × A-mod  Z-mod

(9.1)

The category of non-degenerate left A-modules, A-modnd, has enough projective objects7 and so we can derive the functors (9.1) on the first argument since non-degenerate projective modules are still acyclic:

RHomA(-, -) : (Db(A-modnd))op × Db(modnd-A)  D(Z-mod) - LA - : Db(modnd-A) × Db(A-mod)  D(Z-mod)

(9.2)

Remark 9.2. The functor HomA(-, A) : (A-modnd)op  mod-A does not land inside the subcategory of non-degenerate modules. This can already be seen for A itself: HomA(A, A) lime eA where the limit is taken over the poset of idempotents e in A (can take a filtered subset). However, if M is a finitely generated non-degenerate module then HomA(M, A) is non-degenerate.
For two A-modules M, N  A-modnd, there is a canonical morphism

canN,M : HomA(M, A) A N  HomA(M, N ) that extends to the derived category Db(A-modnd)

(9.3)

canM,M : RHomA(M, A) LA N  RHomA(M, N ).

(9.4)

Definition 9.3. A non-degenerate module M over A is said to be perfect if it has a finite resolution by finitely generated non-degenerate projective A-modules. An object of Db(A-modnd) is said to be perfect if it is isomorphic to a complex of finitely generated non-degenerate projective A-modules.
The next lemma tells us that canN,M is an isomorphism when M is perfect: Lemma 9.4. If M, N  Db(A-modnd) and M is perfect, the canonical morphism (9.4)
RHomA(M, A) LA N  RHomA(M, N )
is an isomorphism.

Proof. In this proof all modules are non-degenerate. We split the proof into several steps.
First notice that for M = Ae with e an idempotent we have canonical identifications RHomA(Ae, N ) = HomA(Ae, N ) = eN and in particular HomA(Ae, A) = eA is a projective right A-module and so one can compute the derived tensor product with it. Hence in this situation we have
RHomA(Ae, A) L N = eA A N = eN = HomA(Ae, N )
7We do not know if the category of all left modules over A has enough projective objects, but this plays no role for us.

41

and we are done.

Second, notice that the canonical morphism from the statement of the lemma is compatible
with finite direct sums (in both arguments). Since a finitely generated projective module is a direct summand of ni=1Aei for some idempotents ei we deduce the validity of the lemma for M a finitely generated projective module.

Next, let M be a perfect complex, quasi-isomorphic to P· where each Pr is a finitely generated non-degenerate projective module.
For N = N·  Db(A-modnd), RHomA(M, N ) is computed by the totalization of a double complex with entries HomA(Pr, Ns) which by what we said above is isomorphic to HomA(Pr, A) A Ns through canPr,Ns. The latter are the entries of the double complex HomA(P·, A) A N· whose totalization computes RHomA(M, A) LA N . The naturality of (9.3) ensures that these isomorphisms commute with all the differentials in the double complexes and therefore the total complexes are isomorphic. In other words, the natural map canN,M : RHomA(M, A) LA N  RHomA(M, N ) is an isomorphism.

Definition 9.5. For an A-module P , we denote by P nd its non-degenerate submodule, i.e., the subspace of P consisting of elements that are fixed by some idempotent in A.

It is clear that a morphism from a non-degenerate A-module to an arbitrary A-module lands inside its non-degenerate part. Said otherwise, we have
Proposition 9.6. The right adjoint of the natural inclusion A-modnd  A-mod is the functor (-)nd of taking the non-degenerate part of a module. Moreover (-)nd is exact so the adjunction extends trivially to derived categories.

Contragredient. Any non-degenerate left or right A-module M has a natural structure of k-vector space. We can therefore construct the contragredient module M  := Homk(M, k)nd as the non-degenerate k-linear maps from M to k. We extend the contragredient to the bounded derived categories
(-) : Db(A-modnd)  Db(modnd-A)

by applying it degree-wise.

For a right A-module M , a left A-module N , both non-degenerate and a k-vector space V , we have a natural adjunction morphism

M,N,V : Homk(M A N, V )  HomA(N, Homk(M, V )nd)

that can be checked (as in the classical situation) to be an isomorphism. This isomorphism extends to bounded derived categories and we get the usual derived tensor-hom adjunction

M,N,V : RHomk(M LA N, V )  RHomA(N, RHomk(M, V )nd)

(9.5)

For a complex of vector spaces V  Db(k), we denote by V , the complex of dual vector spaces.
Denote by Dpberf(A-modnd), the full subcategory of Db(A-modnd) consisting of perfect complexes.

42

Theorem 9.7. The following functor
DNak : Dpberf (A-modnd) - Db(A-modnd) M  RHomA(M, A),
is a Serre functor, i.e., for any perfect object M and any object N  Db(A-modnd), we have a natural isomorphism of k-vector spaces:
HomDb(A)(M, N ) HomDb(A)(N, DNak(M )).

Remark 9.8. A Serre functor (see Section 2.2) is, moreover, required to be an equivalence of categories. In our situation, in order for DNak to be an equivalence, we must restrict to finite dimensional modules (because of duality over k). In the context of representations of p-adic groups this means restricting to admissible modules. Replacing the contragredient by Grothendieck­Serre duality over the Bernstein center extends DNak from admissible modules to finitely generated modules and indeed gives a Serre functor (relative to the center) for the whole category of finitely generated representations.8 This statement already appears in [BBK18].

Proof. Apply Lemma 9.4 and the tensor-hom adjunction (9.5) to get natural quasiisomorphisms

RHomk(RHomA(M, N ), k)

L
RHomk(RHomA(M, A) A N, k) RHomA(N, RHomk(RHomA(M, A), k)nd) RHomA(N, RHomA(M, A)) RHomA(N, DNak(M )).

Taking H0 gives the desired result.

Putting N = M, DNak(M ) above, we get the following:
Corollary 9.9. Suppose M is a non-degenerate irreducible left A-module which belongs to Dpberf(A-modnd) and for which Schur's lemma holds. Then,
HomDb(A)(M, M ) HomDb(A)(M, DNak(M )) HomDb(A)(DNak(M ), DNak(M )) k.

Remark 9.10. The above corollary shows that for M irreducible, DNak(M ) is indecomposable. So if DNak(M ) is concentrated in degree 0, then it is isomorphic to M . In particular, if M is irreducible and projective, then DNak(M ) M . If we apply it to a finite dimensional semisimple algebra A, then we get the simple fact that DNak leaves stable every irreducible module. See Corollary 12.25 for a statement for p-adic groups. In general however, it looks like DNak(M ) might be an interesting, non-trivial, involution.
8We are indebted to Roman Bezrukavnikov for explaining this to us.

43

Taking N = DNak(M ) in the above theorem we get a canonical map

canM : HomDb(A)(M, DNak(M ))  k

(9.6)

and moreover, unwinding the definitions (see the proof of Theorem 9.7), we obtain Corollary 9.11. For M, N  Db(A-modnd) with M perfect, the natural pairing

HomDb(A)(M, N ) × HomDb(A)(N, DNak(M ))  HomDb(A)(M, DNak(M )) canM k

is perfect giving rise to the isomorphism

HomDb(A)(M, N ) HomDb(A)(N, DNak(M ))

from Theorem 9.7. Define the homological duality functor as

Dh : D+(A-mod) - D-(mod-A)op M  RHomA(M, A)

(9.7)

The same formula sends a right module into a left module. By abuse of notation we will still write Dh for this functor.
Notice that without further hypotheses, the target category of Dh is only bounded from below.
Proposition 9.12. The functor Dh preserves perfect complexes and is an involution on Dpberf (A-modnd).

Proof. Notice that if P is a finitely generated projective left A-module, then HomA(P, A) is a finitely generated projective right A-module. It follows that Dh preserves perfect complexes.
Let us now prove that Dh2 Id on perfect complexes. There is a natural transformation ev : Id  Dh2 coming from the evaluation morphism

evP : P  HomA(HomA(P, A), A).

Note that evP is compatible with finite direct sums, i.e., evPi = ievPi. Hence in order to show that evP is an isomorphism for every finitely generated projective, it is enough to show it for P = Ae, where e is an idempotent. But then HomA(P, A) = eA and HomA(eA, A) = Ae = P and so clearly evP is an isomorphism.
Since ev is a natural transformation (functorial) it behaves well on complexes and hence we deduce that evP · is also an isomorphism for every perfect complex P ·  Dpberf (A-modnd).

We denote by Dfbg(A-modnd), the bounded derived category of finitely generated, nondegenerate, left A-modules. (Similarly for right A-modules.)

44

Corollary 9.13. Suppose A has both left and right finite homological dimension. Then the homological duality Dh gives a functor
Dh : Dfbg(A-modnd)  Dfbg(modnd-A)op
whose square is isomorphic to the identity, i.e., Dh2 Id.
Proof. Since A has finite left and right homological dimension, Dfbg(A-modnd) = Dpberf(A-modnd), and similarly for right modules. Now, the conclusion follows from Proposition 9.12.

10 Homological duality

10.1 Vanishing
Here we prove the vanishing part of our main result, namely Theorem 1.3(1), following the strategy in [Ber92].
The main ingredients are Section 6 on Bernstein's decomposition, Bernstein's second adjoint Theorem 7.15, and the vanishing result from Proposition 8.7.
Consider M(G)fg the full subcategory of smooth representations of G which are finitely generated. It is still an abelian category and the parabolic induction and restriction functors preserve it. The homological duality is defined as the following functor between derived categories

Dh : Dfbg(M(G))  Dfbg(M(G))op   RHomG(, H(G))

(10.1)

where H(G) denotes the Hecke algebra of G. The structure of left G representation is through the right action of H(G) on itself and through the involution f  f: H(G)  H(G) defined by f(g) := f (g-1).

Remark 10.1.
1. Notice that Dh lands indeed in the bounded derived category because the category of smooth representations M(G) has finite global dimension (Section 2.6).
2. One could also define Dh without the assumption on finitely generated but then Dh would land outside smooth modules, indeed in the category of all H(G)-modules. We could come back to smooth modules simply by taking the smooth part (see the paragraph after Proposition 7.9).
The following theorem is the most important property of the homological duality functor and is due to Bernstein. Fix s = [L, ]  B(G) a cuspidal datum.
Theorem 10.2. If   M(G)s is of finite length, then Dh() has cohomology only in degree d(s).

45

Proof. (following [Ber92, Theorem 31]) We need to show that Exti (, H) = 0 for i = d(s), G
where we put for short H = H(G).

Decompose the representation H(G) according to Bernstein's decomposition, Theorem 6.16. Clearly only the component H(G)s is important to us. Moreover, since H(G) is a projective representation (Remark 2.14), and s is a projective generator of M(G)s (see Lemma 8.10), it is enough to show:

ExtiG(, s) = 0, for all i = d(s).

(10.2)

Recall

from

§8.2

that

s

=

P

iG
L,P

([]),

where

the

sum

ranges

over

all

parabolics

with

Levi

subgroup L. Since parabolic induction and restriction are exact functors, the Frobenius

adjunction gives

ExtiG(, s) = P ExtiL(rGL,P (), []).

(10.3)

The representation  is admissible (because every irreducible representation is admissible by Theorem 5.3) and because parabolic restriction preserves admissibility and finite type,
rG () is a finite type admissible representation of L. As such, it is of finite length. L,P
Through the categorical equivalence M(L)[] mod-R[] (see Proposition 8.11), the vanishing of (10.3) follows from

ExtiR[](V, R[]) = 0, for all i = d() = d(s), for all finite dimensional R[]-modules V . This was proved in Proposition 8.7.

Given   M(G)fls a finite length representation in a given block, we will denote by Dh() the representation Hd(s)(Dh()).

10.2 Interaction with induction and restriction

The objective of this section is to investigate how does the (full, derived) homological duality commute with parabolic induction and restriction. We follow the proof of the linear case from [Ber92, Theorem 31(4,5)].

Proposition 10.3. Let P = LN be a parabolic with Levi decomposition in G. We have the following natural isomorphisms of functors when restricted to the bounded derived category of finitely generated smooth G-modules Db(M(G)fg):

1. DhiGL,P

iG
L,P

-

Dh

,

2. DhrGL,P

rG L,P

Dh

.

Proof. To shorten the notation, we write iP and rP for the parabolic induction and restriction functors.

Since all objects in M(G)fg admit a finite resolution by finitely generated projective objects, it is enough to define and prove the required isomorphisms for finitely generated

46

projective objects. Therefore, using the second adjointness and the Frobenius reciprocity, we see that the isomorphisms in part (1) and in part (2) of the proposition are equivalent to proving natural isomorphisms

iP - HomL(V, H(L)) HomL(V, rP -(H(G))), rP HomG(W, H(G)) HomG(W, iP (H(L))),

(10.4) (10.5)

for V  M(L) and W  M(G), both projective, and finitely generated representations, and where we have considered H(L) as an L × L module and H(G) as a G × G-module.

For the proof of these isomorphisms, we begin by noticing the following identifications of L × G-modules:

(id ×iP )(H(L)) Cc((G × L)/P ) Cc(G/N ) (id ×rP )(H(G)).

(10.6)

The following is an easy but crucial observation valid for any finitely generated smooth representation V of L (we will apply this to finitely generated projective modules as noted earlier):

iP HomL(V, H(L)) HomL(V, (id ×iP )(H(L)),

(10.7)

as representations of G where in HomL(V, H(L)), both V and H(L) are considered as left L-modules, thus HomL(V, H(L)) is a right L-module through the right L-action on H(L);

the

L

×

G-representation

(id

×iP )(H(L))

=

iG(H(L))
P

has

L

action

through

the

left

action

of L on H(L), and a right G action. To see the isomorphism in equation (10.7), note that

by the definition of an induced representation, both sides of (10.7) give rise to functions

F : G × V  H(L) which are linear maps V  H(L) when restricted to any g  G, and

satisfy:

1. F (g, v) = F (g, v), for all g  G,  L, v  V .

2. F (gp, v) = F (g, v) · where p  P = LN has the form p = n, with  L, and n  N.

Further, such an F arises from the left hand side of the isomorphism in (10.7) if and only if the corresponding map G  Hom(V, H(L)) is locally constant on G, whereas such an F arises from the right hand side of the equality in eq. (10.7) if and only if for each v  V , F (-, v) is a locally constant map from G to H(L). Thus the functions F which arise from the left hand side of equation (10.7) are always contained in those which arise from the right hand side, and the converse holds if V is finitely generated over L, say by v1, · · · , vn. Then assuming that each of the functions F (-, vi) are constant in a neighborhood U (g0) of a fixed g0  G, then by equation 1. above, F (g, vi) = F (g, vi) = F (g0, vi) for all g  U (g0),  L, hence F (g, v) = F (g0, v) for all g  U (g0), v  V . Now the isomorphism (10.7) (applied to P - in place of P ) together with (10.6) proves the isomorphism (10.4), and hence the isomorphism in part 1. of the proposition.

Similarly for any finitely generated smooth, projective, representation W of G we have

rP HomG(W, H(G)) HomG(W, (id ×rP )(H(G)),

47

as L-modules and naturally in W . This assertion is equivalent to proving that the Jacquet module of HomG(W, H(G)) (considered as a right G-module) is the same as HomG(W, Cc(G/N )) which is equivalent to proving that:
1. the natural map from HomG(W, H(G)) to HomG(W, Cc(G/N )) is surjective. This is a consequence of W being projective.
2. The kernel of the natural map HomG(W, H(G))  HomG(W, Cc(G/N )) consists of HomG(W, H(G))[N ] where for any smooth representation W of N ,
W[N ] = {n · w - w|w  W} = {v  W| n · v = 0}
Ni
where Ni is some compact open subgroup of N depending on v  W. It follows that
HomG(W, H(G))[N ] = HomG(W, H(G)[N ]),
using that HomG(W, H(G)) is a smooth representation of N which is the case as W is a finitely generated G-module. Applying the functor HomG(W, -) to the exact sequence
0  H(G)[N ]  H(G)  Cc(G/N )  0,
and noting that W is projective, we have the exact sequence
0  HomG(W, H(G)[N ])  HomG(W, H(G))  HomG(W, Cc(G/N ))  0,
proving the assertion that the Jacquet module of HomG(W, H(G)), considered as a right Gmodule, is the same as HomG(W, Cc(G/N )). This completes the proof of the isomorphism in (10.5), and hence part 2. of the proposition.
10.3 On projective generators
In order to better understand the homological duality functor Dh, we will compute its value on the projective generators []  M(G)[] and s  M(G)s from Section 8. The answer is as nice as it could possibly be. Then we will use this computation to describe the functors (-) and Dh on the Rs-side: we obtain the contragredient resp., homological duality for Rs. Recall that if   M(G) is irreducible cuspidal, then  was defined to be indGG(|G). Since a cuspidal representation is compact modulo center by Harish-Chandra's theorem, the following is a restatement of Corollary 3.19: Lemma 10.4. If   M(G) is irreducible cuspidal, then
Dh([]) [].
48

Let s = (L, )  B(G) be a cuspidal datum (up to inertia and conjugation). The projective generator s  M(G)s was defined in Section 8.2 as

s

=

P

iG
L,P

[]

where the sum goes over all parabolics with Levi L. We denote by s = (L, ) the contragredient cuspidal datum (it could be the same as s but in general it is not).
Proposition 10.5. With the above notation we have Dh(s) s.

Proof. Use the previous lemma together with DhiGL,P

iG
L,P

-

Dh

(see

Proposition

10.3)

to

get the following isomorphisms

Dh(s) = P Dh(iGL,P ([])) P iL,P - Dh([]) P iL,P - []
= s .

Corollary 10.6. Homological duality restricts to a functor Dh : Db(M(G)s)  Db(M(G)s)op which is moreover involutive when restricted to finitely generated modules.
Proof. The functor Dh sends the projective generator s of M(G)s to the projective generator s of M(G)s. The duality statement for finitely generated follows from Corollary 9.13.
Thank to the vanishing result for finite length modules (Theorem 10.2), we can deduce Corollary 10.7. The functor Dh restricts to an involution
Dh : M(G)fls  (M(G)fls)op.

Corollary 10.8. The homological duality induces an anti-isomorphism of algebras
Rs Rs , or equivalently, an isomorphism of algebras Rosp Rs. Proof. Since Dh2 Id (see Corollary 9.13) we see that in particular Dh is an equivalence of categories (contravariant). Hence it induces an anti-isomorphism of algebras:
Rs = HomG(s, s) HomG(Dhs, Dhs) = Rs where in the last equality we used Proposition 10.5.

49

The above corollary means that we have an equivalence of categories Rs-mod mod-Rs. In other words, given a right module V  mod-Rs its dual V  = HomC(V, C) is naturally a left Rs-module, hence we can view it as a right Rs-module. Put shortly, taking the dual vector spaces gives us a functor
(-) : mod-Rs  mod-Rs.

We are now ready to describe the contragredient on the Rs-module side. The answer is not surprising at all:
Proposition 10.9. There is a commutative square of functors

M(G)s



mod-Rs

(-)

(-)

(M(G)s)op  (mod-Rs)op.

Proof. The fact that the vertical right arrow makes sense was discussed above as a consequence of Corollary 10.8
Note that s being projective and finitely generated, together with the calculation from Proposition 10.5, implies that we havex natural isomorphisms of functors

HomG(s, -) HomG(s, H(G)) H(G) - s H(G) -.

Let V  M(G)s and use tensor-hom adjunction to obtain natural isomorphisms

HomG(s, V )

Hom(s H(G) V, C)
HomG(s, V ) HomG(s, V )

where the last equality follows because the image of a smooth module is smooth.

As a final computation, we show that the homological duality on the M(G)s side goes to homological duality on the Rs-module side:
Proposition 10.10. There is a commutative square of functors

Db(M(G)s)  Db(mod-Rs)

Dh

Dh

Db(M(G)s)op  Db(mod-Rs)op.

where the Dh on the right is RHomRs(-, Rs) and we again use the algebra anti-isomorphism Rs Rs from Corollary 10.8.

50

Proof. We deal first with the left-bottom composition. Since Dh is involutive (see Corollary 9.13), it induces an isomorphism on Hom spaces. In particular, using Proposition 10.5, we get an isomorphism of left Rs-modules
RHomG(s, Dh(V )) = RHomG(V, s)
for all V  Db(M(G)s).
On the other hand, let us recall that the equivalence M(G)s  mod-Rs was given by the functor HomG(s, -). The tensor-Hom adjunction gives its left adjoint as - Rs s. Being an equivalence implies the adjunction is a bi-adjunction, i.e., we also have that HomG(s, -) is left adjoint to - Rs s. We can now compute the right-top composition and conclude the proof:

RHomRs(RHomG(s, V ), Rs) natural isomorphisms of left Rs-modules.

RHomG(V, Rs Rs s) RHomG(V, s),

Remark 10.11. Using a similar argument and Morita theory (see for example [Par70, 4.11 Theorem 2, Corollary 2]) one shows that under an equivalence of module categories R-mod S-mod, the R-bimodule R is sent to the S-bimodule S, and as a consequence, the homological duality for R corresponds to the homological duality for S.
As a consequence of this section, in order to study homological duality on M(G) we can study it on mod-Rs for all the cuspidal data s. This will play an important role in Section 12.2 where we show that homological duality on finite length cuspidals is isomorphic to the contragredient (up to a shift).

11 The duality theorem of Schneider­Stuhler

We will use the duality theorem from Section 9, applied to the Hecke algebra H(G), to deduce a theorem of Schneider and Stuhler [SS97, Duality theorem]. In loc.cit., the result is stated and proved in the subcategory of modules with central character but this restriction was removed in [NP20]. Our proof is independent both of [SS97] and of [NP20], and it provides moreover a generalization of the main result of [NP20] from irreducible modules to modules of finite length. The approach that we take was suggested in [BBK18, §3.4].

Let s = [, L]  B(G) be a cuspidal datum and put d = d(s) the split rank of the center of L. We denote the contragredient cuspidal datum by s = [, L] for which we have d(s) = d.
Recall that in Theorem 10.2 it was proved that, for   M(G)fls , we have Hi(Dh()) = 0 only for i = d. We put Dh() = Hd(Dh()).
Theorem 11.1. Let   M(G)fls be a finite length representation in the Bernstein block s and let   M(G) be any smooth representation. Then the natural pairing

ExtiG(,



)

×

Extd-i( G

,

Dh())



Extd()(, G

Dh())



C

51

provides an isomorphism

ExtiG(,  )

Extd-i( G

,

Dh()).

If  is, moreover, irreducible, then ExtdG(, Dh()) C.
Proof. The first part is just a reformulation of Corollary 9.11. The second part comes from Corollary 9.9 by noticing that DNak() = Dh()[d].

Remark 11.2. Note that (·)  Dh is an endofunctor of the category M(G)fls of finite length modules. We would like to think that Dh commutes with the contragredient on finite length modules but we are not able to prove it. Another way to reformulate it is to say that (-)  Dh is an involution on M(G)fls . Corollary 12.25 confirms this for finite length cuspidal representations. More generally, Dh should commute with Grothendieck­Serre duality (over the Bernstein center) for all finitely generated G-modules.9
12 Dualities on finite length representations
In this section we prove that the homological duality restricted to finite length cuspidal reprsentations is nothing else but contragredient duality up to a shift (see Corollary 12.25). Along the way we will show the well-known fact that Grothendieck­Serre duality over the Bernstein center, restricted to finite length modules, is just the contragredient duality (see Corollary 12.23).
The tools that we will use are the dualizing (or canonical) complex A  Db(A-mod) for a commutative ring as well as the exceptional pull-back functor f ! : D+(A-mod)  D+(B-mod) for any finite map of algebras f : A  B. We will provide some of the details without striving for optimal generality. For a thorough discussion of these matters, one should consult [Har66, Ch III] or [Sta21, 0A7A]. Check [Sta21, 0AU3] for a summary.
We start with some general discussion of Grothendieck­Serre and homological duality, and then we apply it to the context of smooth representation of p-adic groups.
12.1 General algebra
For an algebra R, we denote by R-mod the abelian category of left modules over R. We put D+(R-mod) for the bounded below derived category of R-mod and Db(R-mod) for the bounded derived category. For right modules we use the notation mod-R. The full subcategory of R-mod consisting of finite length modules is denoted by R-modfl and similarly for right modules.
To simplify the discussion of dualizing complexes and upper-shriek funtoriality, we start with the following definition:
9This was suggested to us by Roman Bezrukavnikov.
52

Definition 12.1. For the polynomial ring A = k[X1, . . . , Xd], we put A = A[d] as an object in Db(A-mod) and call it the normalized dualizing complex.
Remark 12.2. Notice that in general one speaks of dualizing complexes over a ring A (or more generally over a scheme X) and that they are not unique. In order to make it unique, one normalizes it in such a way to make it compatible with exceptional pullback functors f !, i.e., such that f !Y = X for any map of schemes f : X  Y . Since a discussion about f ! for a general map of algebras f : A  B would take us too far afield, we prefer to start by Definition 12.1 and only discuss f ! for finite maps.
As a trivial example, notice that for a field k, we have k = k[0].
If f : A  B is a map of (commutative) algebras, then the natural restriction functor B-mod  A-mod is exact and extends in the obvious way to derived categories. We will denote this functor by f : Db(B-mod)  Db(A-mod). Notice that it can also be described as f = ABB B - where we have denoted by ABB the A-B-bimodule B.
Lemma 12.3. Let f : A  B be a finite map of commutative algebras. Then the restriction functor f : D+(B-mod)  D+(A-mod) is left adjoint to functor
f ! := RHomA(B, -) : D+(A-mod)  D+(B-mod).
Proof. Since f = ABB  - the tensor-Hom adjunction gives for a B-module M and an A-module N the following natural isomorphism:
RHomA(B B M, N ) = RHomB(M, RHomA(B, N )).
In other words f ! is right adjoint to f.
Remark 12.4. The previous proof does not need the map f to be finite. If the map f is not finite, the right adjoint RHomA(B, -) is not denoted by f !. In general, f ! is right adjoint to a functor f! (restriction with compact support) that we will not define (see for example [Har66, Appendix] or [Sta21, 0G4Z]). See [Sta21, 0A9Y] for a construction of f ! in general. If f is a finite map, then f = f!, so the right adjoint of f deserves the name f !.
Definition 12.5. Suppose we have defined for a commutative k-algebra A, a (normalized) dualizing complex A  Db(A-mod). Then for any finite map f : A  B of commutative algebras, we put B := f !(A ) and call it the (normalized) dualizing complex of B.
Remark 12.6. This definition of B seems to depend on A and on the map f . It turns out that this is not the case, see [Sta21, 0A7A] and more generally [Sta21, 0BZI] for details.
Example 12.7. For any ideal I  A, the map A  A/I is finite, hence A /I = RHomA(A/I, A ). In particular, for m a maximal ideal of A with residue field k, we recover RHomA(k, A ) = k = k[0].
Example 12.8. If A is a finite dimensional k-algebra, then A = A[0]. Indeed, using the finite map k  A, and the fact that k = k[0], we deduce immediately the equality A = RHomk(A, k) = A[0].
53

Definition 12.9. For a commutative k-algebra A with normalized dualizing complex A , we define the Grothendieck­Serre duality functor as
DGS := RHomA(-, A ) : Db(A-mod)  (Db(A-mod))op.
Remark 12.10. The canonical evaluation morphism Id  DG2 S is an isomorphism on finitely generated modules. This follows by the definition of a dualizing complex, see [Sta21, 0A7C].
Example 12.11. For A a finite dimensional commutative k-algebra we have that DGS = (-). To see this, use that A = A[0] and the tensor-Hom adjunction.
Lemma 12.12. For any commutative algebra A with normalized dualizing complex A , the functor DGS restricts to a duality
DGS : A-modfl  (A-modfl)op
which moreover can be identified with the contragredient duality (-) = Homk(-, k).
Proof. Let M be a finite length A-module. Then there exists a finite codimension ideal I  A such that the A-module structure on M factors through the (finite) map of algebras A  A/I. Using the right adjoint of restriction (see Lemma 12.3) together with the definition of the normalized dualizing complex, we get natural isomorphisms of A-modules:
DGS(M ) = RHomA(M, A ) = RHomA/I (M, RHomA(A/I, A )) = RHomA/I (M, A /I ) = RHomA/I (M, (A/I)) = M
where in the last two equalities we have used Example 12.11.
Remark 12.13. Part of the content of the above lemma is that DGS(M ) is concentrated in a single degree if M is a finite length A-module. This is not a priori obvious from the definition of DGS and it is a feature of dualizing complexes. The fact that it lives in degree 0 has to do with the normalization that we chose.
We would like to apply all this to non-commutative algebras. From now on, we consider R a (possibly) non-commutative k-algebra together with an algebra map A  Z(R) from a commutative k-algebra A to the center of R. Suppose moreover that R is finite as an A-module and that A has a (normalized) dualizing complex A . The category of left R-modules becomes linear over A and therefore one can consider the following functor
DGS/A : Db(R-mod)  (Db(mod-R))op M  RHomA(M, A )
from the (bounded) derived category of left R-modules to the derived category of right R-modules. We will abuse notation and denote by the same symbol the similar functor from right modules to left modules.
54

Definition 12.14. A duality on a k-linear category C is a k-linear functor D : C  Cop such that D2 Id. Notice that for abelian and triangulated categories, a duality is necessarily exact. Corollary 12.15. In the above setting, the functor DGS/A restricts to a duality
DGS/A : R-modfl  (modfl-R)op that can be moreover identified with the contragredient (-).

Proof. Observe that since R is a finite A-module, any finite length R-module restricts
to a finite length A-module. We can therefore apply Lemma 12.12 to deduce that DGS/A(M ) M  as A-modules for any M a finite length left (resp., right) R-module. The naturality implies the isomorphism DGS/A(M ) M  holds also as right (resp., left) R-modules.

Remark 12.16. Notice that if we do not assume that R is finite over A, then the proof still applies to R-modules that are of finite length as A-modules.

Recall that for a k-algebra R, the homological duality was defined in Section 9 as the functor
Dh := RHomR(-, R) : D±(R-mod)  D(mod-R)op,
where it was shown that it is a duality on perfect complexes. If moreover R has finite global dimension, then we get a duality on the bounded derived category of finitely generated R-modules (see Proposition 9.12):

Dh : Dfbg(R-mod)  Dfbg(mod-R)op.
In general, there is no reason for this functor to preserve any abelian subcategories or to have good properties. However, in the case of representations of p-adic groups it does (see Theorem 10.2) thanks to second-adjointness and the following technical condition that is satisfied on the cuspidal blocks (keeping the assumptions on R and A):

there is an integer d such that DGS/A(R) R[d] as R-bimodules

(FsG)

Remark 12.17. The name (FsG) is inspired by Frobenius symmetric and Gorenstein since for a finite dimensional k-algebra the above condition is equivalent to R being Frobenius symmetric. If R is commutative and local then this condition is equivalent to R being Gorenstein.
Proposition 12.18. Keeping the same assumptions, suppose moreover that R satisfies condition (FsG) above. Then the (shifted by d) homological duality functor [d]  Dh is isomorphic to DGS/A. In particular, it restricts to a duality on finite length R-modules
[d]  Dh : R-modfl  (modfl-R)op
that is moreover isomorphic to the contragredient.

55

Proof. Using condition (FsG), tensor-hom adjunction and Corollary 12.15 we get natural isomorphisms of functors:
[d]  Dh = [d]  RHomR(-, R) = RHomR(-, RHomA(R, A )) = RHomA(-, A ) = DGS/A = (-) for finite length modules.

Remark 12.19. If in Condition (FsG), we replace R-bimodule by left R-module, then we still get that [d]  Dh sends R-modfl to modfl-R but we can not identify it with the contragredient.
The above proof gives us a bit more:
Corollary 12.20. Keeping the same assumptions, we have that [d]  Dh DGS/A on all R-modules if and only if condition (FsG) is satisfied.

Proof. By the definition of DGS/A and adjunction we have
DGS/A = RHomA(-, A ) = RHomR(-, RHomA(R, A ))
and by Yoneda's lemma this last functor is isomorphic to [d]  Dh = RHom(-, R[d]) if and only if condition (FsG) is satisfied.

Let us consider a particular case that will be of importance to us. Suppose that R is a finite projective A-algebra where A = k[X1±1, . . . , Xd±1]. We have that A = A[d] and then condition (FsG) becomes

HomA(R, A) R as R-bimodules.

(12.1)

Corollary 12.21. Keeping the above notation and assuming condition (12.1), we have the following isomorphisms of functors when restricted to finite-length R-modules
RHomR(-, R)[d] RHomA(-, A)[d] Homk(-, k).

12.2 Consequences for representations

Recall the Bernstein decomposition (Theorem 6.16): the category M(G) of smooth

representations of G decomposes into blocks M(G) have M(G)s mod-Rs (see Proposition 8.11).

s M(G)s, and for each block, we

Moreover, we have shown (see Proposition 10.9 and Proposition 10.10) that under the equivalence M(G)s mod-Rs, the contragredient on M(G)s corresponds to taking dual vector spaces on mod-Rs and that homological duality on M(G)s corresponds to homological duality on mod-Rs.

56

Recall from Section 8.3 that the center of the block M(G)s is Zs := Z(Rs) and that Rs is finite over Zs. From the block decomposition, the (Bernstein) center of the category M(G) satisfies
Z = Zs.
s
Moreover, we know that each Zs is the ring of invariants of a Laurent polynomial ring by a finite group (see Theorem 8.12), therefore it is a Cohen-Macaulay ring, and has a dualizing complex Z s. The dualizing complex for the ring Z is then s Z s.
Definition 12.22. The Grothendieck­Serre duality relative to the center is defined by
DGS/Z = RHomZ (-, Z )sm : Dfbg(M(G))  Dfbg(M(G))op
where the superscript "sm" signifies taking smooth vectors.
The fact that DGS/Z lands in the bounded derived category is a feature of the dualizing complex, namely that Grothendieck­Serre duality preserves the bounded derived category of finitely generated modules.
Corollary 12.23. The functor DGS/Z restricted to admissible modules is isomorphic to the contragredient functor. In particular, this holds for all finite length G-modules.

Proof. Let V be an admissible module for G. For any open compact subgroup K  G, V K is a finite dimensional module over the K-biinvariant Hecke algebra H(G//K) and it is also a module over the center Z.
We have the following natural isomorphisms:

RHomZ (V, Z ) = RHomZ ( V K, Z )
K
= lim- RHomZ (V K, Z )
K
= lim-(V K)
K
=V

by Corollary 12.15

and we conclude by taking smooth vectors.

Grothendieck­Serre duality relative to the center behaves well under equivalences of categories. We record the following for completeness as an analogue of Proposition 10.9 and Proposition 10.10.
Proposition 12.24. Let s = [L, ]  B(G) be a cuspidal datum. Then, under the equivalence M(G)s mod-Rs, we have the following commutative square of functors

Db(M(G)s)  Db(mod-Rs)

DGS

DGS

Db(M(G)s)op  Db(mod-Rs)op.

57

Proof. Under an equivalence of categories, the centers are isomorphic. In this proof we put Z := Zs. So the two DGS functors in the diagram are both RHomZ(-, Z ).
Corollary 12.23 ensures that the target of the left vertical arrow is correct. Similarly, use Corollary 12.15 together with Corollary 10.8 for the right vertical arrow.
We have to show that, for V  M(G), there are natural isomorphisms

RHomZ(HomG(s, V ), Z ) HomG(s, RHomZ(V, Z )).

(12.2)

Notice that s is projective, so we don't need to derive the Hom space from it.
Using Lemma 9.4 and Proposition 10.5 we have HomG(s, V ) s H(G) V . We can rewrite the left hand-side of (12.2) and use tensor-hom adjunction to conclude.

Let   M(G) be an irreducible cuspidal representation and put as usual d = rankZ(G/G). It has already been proved that homological duality restricts to a contravariant functor
Dh := [d]  Dh : M(G)fl[]  (M(G)fl[])op,
see Corollary 10.6 and Theorem 10.2. We can see that it is not new: Corollary 12.25. The above functor Dh is isomorphic to the contragredient.

Proof. The block M(G)[] is equivalent to the category mod-R[] and this equivalence commutes with homological duality (see Proposition 10.10) as well as with contragredient (see Proposition 10.9). Moreover, it sends finite length G-modules to finite length R[]modules. In order to prove the claim it is therefore enough to do it for mod-R[].
The center of R[] is a Laurent polynomial algebra of dimension d (see Proposition 8.4) and moreover R[] satisfies condition (12.1) by Corollary 8.6. Applying Corollary 12.21 we conclude.

The same argument gives
Corollary 12.26. On the cuspidal block Db(M(G)[]) we have a natural isomorphism of functors
[d]  Dh DGS/Z .

Remark 12.27. If G is a multiplicative group then all smooth representations of a finite central extension G are cuspidal and therefore the above corollaries applies to all finite length smooth G-modules. Moreover, in this situation the Grothendieck­Serre duality and homological duality agree (up to shift) on all smooth modules.
More generally, the following gives a necessary and sufficient condition for homological duality to be isomorphic to Grothendieck­Serre duality:
Corollary 12.28. On a block Db(M(G)s), we have that [d]  Dh DGS/Z if and only if Rs satisfies condition (FsG).

Proof. Given Proposition 12.24, this is simply a restatement of Corollary 12.20.

58

Let us also note the particular case of a free abelian group  Zd. We have that all representations of  are smooth and the Hecke algebra is just the group algebra C[] C[X1±, . . . , Xd±]. From Corollary 12.21 we get Corollary 12.29. The Grothendieck­Serre duality, (shifted by d) homological duality and contragredient duality all agree on finite length -modules:
DGS = [d]  Dh = (-) as functor on M()fl.
References
[AS00] Aizenbud, Avraham and Sayag, Eitan. Homological multiplicities in representation theory of p-adic groups. Mathematische Zeitschrift, 294(1), 451­469, 2020.
[Art99] Michael Artin. Noncommutative rings. Class Notes, fall, pages 75­77, 1999.
[Aub95] Anne-Marie Aubert. Dualité dans le groupe de Grothendieck de la catégorie des représentations lisses de longueur finie d'un groupe réductif p-adique. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 347(6):2179­2189, 1995.
[BBK18] Joseph Bernstein, Roman Bezrukavnikov, and David Kazhdan. Deligne-Lusztig duality and wonderful compactification. Selecta Math. (N.S.), 24(1):7­20, 2018.
[Ber74] Joseph Bernstein. All reductive p-adic groups are tame. Funktsional'nyi Analiz i ego Prilozheniya, 8(2):3­6, 1974.
[Ber84] J. N. Bernstein. Le "centre" de Bernstein. In Representations of reductive groups over a local field, Travaux en Cours, pages 1­32. Hermann, Paris, 1984. Edited by P. Deligne.
[Ber92] J.N. Bernstein. Representations of p-adic groups. Lectures Notes, Harvard University, 1992.
[Bez04] Roman Bezrukavnikov. Homological properties of representations of p-adic groups related to geometry of the group at infinity. Jun 2004.
[BH03] Colin J. Bushnell and Guy Henniart. Generalized Whittaker models and the Bernstein center. American journal of mathematics, 125(3):513­547, 2003.
[BJ] Dubravka Ban and Chris Jantzen. The Langlands quotient theorem for finite central extensions of p-adic groups I. Glas. Mat. Ser. III 48(68), no. 2, 313­334, 2013.
[BJ16] Dubravka Ban and Chris Jantzen. The Langlands quotient theorem for finite central extensions of p-adic groups II: intertwining operators and duality. Glas. Mat. Ser. III, 51(71), no. 1, 153­163, 2016.
[BK89] Aleksei Bondal and Mikhail Kapranov. Representable functors, serre functors, and mutations. Izvestiya Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk. Seriya Matematicheskaya, 53(6):1183­1205, 1989.
59

[BK04] R. V. Bezrukavnikov and D. B. Kaledin. McKay equivalence for symplectic resolutions of quotient singularities. Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova, 246(Algebr. Geom. Metody, Svyazi i Prilozh.):20­42, 2004.
[BK15] Roman Bezrukavnikov and David Kazhdan. Geometry of second adjointness for p-adic groups. Representation Theory of the American Mathematical Society, 19(14):299­332, 2015.
[BZ76] I. N. Bernstein and A. V. Zelevinskii. Representations of the group GL(n, F ), where F is a local non-Archimedean field. Uspehi Mat. Nauk, 31(3(189)):5­70, 1976.
[Har66] Robin Hartshorne. Residues and duality, volume 20. Springer, 1966.
[Hei04] Volker Heiermann Décomposition spectrale et représentations spéciales d'un groupe réductif p-adique. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu 3 (2004), no. 3, 327-395.
[Huy06] Daniel Huybrechts. Fourier-Mukai transforms in algebraic geometry. Oxford University Press on Demand, 2006.
[MW94] Colette Moeglin and Jean-Loup Waldspurger. Décomposition spectrale et séries d'Eisenstein, volume 113 of Progress in Mathematics. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1994. Une paraphrase de l'Écriture.
[NP20] Madhav V. Nori and Dipendra Prasad. On a duality theorem of schneider-­stuhler. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (Crelles Journal), 762, 261-280, 2020
[Par70] Bodo Pareigis. Categories and functors. Pure and Applied Mathematics, 39, 1970.
[Pra18] Dipendra Prasad. Ext-analogues of branching laws. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians--Rio de Janeiro 2018. Vol. II. Invited lectures, 1367­1392, World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2018.
[Ren10] David Renard. Représentations des groupes réductifs p-adiques. Société mathématique de France Paris, 2010.
[Roc02] Alan Roche. Parabolic induction and the Bernstein decomposition. Compositio Mathematica, 134(2):113­133, 2002.
[SS97] Peter Schneider and Ulrich Stuhler. Representation theory and sheaves on the Bruhat­Tits building. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (85):97­191, 1997.
[Sta21] The Stacks project authors. The stacks project. https://stacks.math.columbia. edu, 2021.
DF: IRMA Institut de Mathematique 7 rue René-Descartes, 67000 Strasbourg
Email: fratila@math.unistra.fr.
DP: Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai.
Email: prasad.dipendra@gmail.com
60

