Ab initio molecular dynamics modelling of organic crystal electro-optical properties
Hovan Lee,1 Mostafa Shalaby,2 and Cedric Weber1 1Department of Physics, Faculty of Natural & Mathematical Sciences,
King's College London, London, WC2R2LS, UK 23 Swiss Terahertz Research-Zurich, Technopark, 8005 Zurich,
Switzerland and Park Innovaare, 5234 Villigen, Switzerland (Dated: June 4, 2021)
Molecular dynamics calculations were preformed on organic crystals 4-N,N-dimethylamino-4'N'-methyl-stilbazolium tosylate (DAST) and 4-N,N-dimethylamino-4'-N'-methylstilbazolium 2,4,6trimethylbenzenesulfonate (DSTMS). Vibrational modes of the structures were investigated to examine the single unit cell phononic contribution of the organic crystals to their terahertz generating capabilities. Linear optical properties were also calculated from snapshots of the molecular dynamics structures through Green-Kubo relations, and compared with experimental transmission.

arXiv:2106.01818v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 3 Jun 2021

I. INTRODUCTION

Throughout the past decades, the research on terahertz (0.1 - 10 THz) frequency generation have been motivated by the plethora of applications of THz technology [1­3]; spanning from biomedical purposes [4­7] to next generation wireless communications [8­10], amongst others [11­16]. The development of these applications were built upon numerous technological advances such as the advent of quantum cascade lasers, femtosecond lasers, time domain spectroscopy and various THz generating sources. Of these THz sources, there exists a general preference across most areas of discipline for broad band, highly efficient and convenient methods of THz generation, often due to the versatility of non-ionising and non-invasive nature of the radiation.
On this note, table-top organic crystal THz sources have become popularised due to their portability and adaptability, as these crystals are capable of generating THz radiation with efficiencies of > 0.1% when pumped with the conventional tunable Ti:Sapphire laser. Moreover, these crystals offer varying applicable pump wavelengths and THz emission spectra, granting the user a method of altering the THz bandwidth, as the need arises.
These organic crystals, such as 4-N,N-dimethylamino4'-N'-methyl-stilbazolium tosylate (DAST) and 4N,N-dimethylamino-4'-N'-methylstilbazolium 2,4,6trimethylbenzenesulfonate (DSTMS), generate THz radiation through the nonlinear optical process of electro-optic rectification. In this process the electronic structure of the material favours a preferred direction of polarisation when influenced by an electromagnetic field. In DAST and DSTMS, this attribute comes from the charge transfer between donors and acceptors, conducted via -electrons [17], which are abundant in the conjugated chains of their respective structures. Through this mechanism, the time-confined (and hence wide spectral bandwidth) nature of the femtosecond pump pulse induces a frequency dependent polarisation mixing, the beating of this polarisation results in THz

FIG. 1. Crystal packing structure of organic crystal DAST.
emission. Vibrational excitations can also influence the polar-
isation along these conjugated chains [18]; vibrational modes distort the ionic structure of the chains, and in turn, the electronic charge conforms to the distorted structure. This can cause further changes of charge distribution along the chain, altering the overall polarisation and polarisability of the materials.
Phononic contributions on the linear electro-optic response of DAST has already been measured [19] and also

2

calculated for a single anion-cation pair, in terms of effects on the near infrared Fourier transform Raman, and Fourier transform infrared spectra [20]. However, such calculations have not been performed on the full crystal packing structure of either DAST nor DSTMS. That is to say that the previous works assume periodicity of the polarisation of a single anion-cation pair to be replicated across the full crystal. This does not account for more complex vibrational modes, such as neighbouring conjugated chains oscillating out of phase, or misalignment between successive anion-cation layers (as shown in Fig.1 for DAST). These effects expand upon the periodicity of a single anion-cation pair, allowing higher orders of variations of polarisability, which influences the calculated electro-optic response of the material.
Furthermore, it was shown [21] that vibrational modes account for roughly 25% of the linear electro-optic coefficient in DAST. Therefore it is essential, even on the linear response level, to include vibrational excitations in the calculation of the optical properties of these organic crystals.
Moreover, little has been done on understanding what roles these vibrational excitations play in the absorption and transmission of THz radiation. Considering that the THz frequency range correspond to vibrational and rotational excitation modes in materials, it is quintessential to develop methods of modelling and understanding absorption and transmission separately. Traditionally,

phonon modes in first-principle methods are calculated via the dynamical matrix, which requires double partial differentials of the system energy with respect to spatial coordinates for each atom in the system. This is computationally costly for the > 200 atom crystal packing unit cells of DAST and DSTMS.
Therefore in this work, we review a method to model optical transmission and absorption in relation to the lattice dynamics; we perform molecular dynamics simulations on the DAST and DSTMS crystal packing structures, analyse the Fourier transform of ionic displacements, and utilise Green-Kubo relations to compare our results to experimentally obtained DAST transmission spectra.
II. THEORY
Molecular dynamics (MD) calculations were performed using the first-principles planewave software Qbox. These calculations were carried out, at ambient temperature using the B3LYP hybrid density functional, for the DAST and DSTMS crystal packing structures. Atomic coordinates at time step intervals of the MD simulation were obtained, and their optical conductivities were calculated through Green-Kubo relations using in-house software:

(()) = 2e2 V

f ( ) - f ( + )

d



tr{(k)A(k,  )(k)A(k,  + )}

(1)

k

where (()) signifies the real part of the conductivity matrix element in the Cartesian directions  and  at frequency , e is the magnitude of the electron charge, V is the volume of the simulation, f ( ) is the FermiDirac distribution at energy  , and tr{. . . } denotes the trace over spectral functions A(k, ) and Fermi velocities (k).
The optical conductivity () of a material can be expressed as a frequency dependant rank 2 tensor, and is related to the complex dielectric tensor of a material:

complex() =

(1)()

+

4i  ()

=



(1) + i (2)

(2)

where (1) and (2) are the real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric functional respectively. (1) tensor elements were obtained through Kramers Kronig relations[22]:

(1)()

=

1

+

2 P


 0

(2)( )  2 - 2

d

(3)

where P denotes the principle value.

The dielectric tensor of the geometry optimised structure was diagonalised to obtain the equilibrium dielectric functions along the crystal axes of the material, together with the rotational vectors which transforms the system into the crystal frame. The dielectric tensors of the MD snapshots were then transformed with respect to these equilibrium frame rotational vectors, in order to calculate the optical properties along the axes of the crystal. The dielectric function along the a-axis of the crystal, which contains the largest nonlinear coefficient d111[23] of DAST and DSTMS, was geometrically identified.
The optical constants of the solid[24] are expressed as:

11 complex

()

=

n~()

+

ik~()

(4)

where n~ is the refractive index and k~ is the extinction coefficient. From these terms, the absorption coefficient was calculated:

2k~()

() =

(5)

c

here  is the absorption coefficient, and c is the speed of light. Which was used to calculate the absorption of the

3

FIG. 2. Flowchart of the procedure of calculations in obtaining the optical properties of the simulated materials.

material of length l:

A = exp(-l)

(6)

and the transmission of the material is then: (1 - n~)2 + k~2
T = 1 - A - R = 1 - exp(-l) - (1 + n~)2 + k~2 (7)

where R is the reflectivity of the material. The full procedure of calculating the optical properties
in DAST and DSTMS, as carried out in this work, is illustrated in Fig.2.

III. RESULTS
The centre of mass of the stibazolium chains were calculated, and their change in displacement along the crystal a-axis between 2 neighbouring stibazolium chains is shown in Fig.3.a) for DAST and DSTMS at 300 K. In this figure, we observe oscillations around the equilibrium distance, with amplitudes of  0.2°A for both organic crystals, showcasing effects that cannot be observed from simulating a single anion-cation pair alone. Moreover, the amplitude of Fourier transforms of the oscillations are shown in Fig.3.b), here we observe the largest oscillations in the ranges of 0 - 4 T Hz for DAST, and 0 - 2 T Hz for DSTMS. The peak spectral amplitude of DSTMS is roughly threefold of the peak amplitude of DAST, suggesting that at room temperature for the oscillation mode at 3 T Hz, the contribution of vibrational excitations on the linear response level is even greater than that of DAST.
In Fig.3.c) and Fig.3.d) these effects are shown, for the crystal b-axis, on a greater extent: the waveform of the oscillations are smoother and at greater amplitudes, at  0.4°A. In the Fourier analysis, where the amplitudes are normalised to the same value as in Fig.3.a), the band of oscillation frequencies for DAST remains between 0-4 T Hz, with a twofold increased relative amplitude in the

range of 3 - 4 T Hz, where as the DSTMS band increases in width from 1 - 2 T Hz to 0 - 3 T Hz, whilst maintaining similar frequency features at double the amplitude between the a-axis and b - axis. This implies that the effects of vibrational excitations are greater along the baxis when compared to the a-axis.
This highlights the importance of accounting for structural vibrations when examining the THz optical properties of DAST and DSTMS; the charge transfer axes of the stibazolium conjugated chains are at angles ±23 with respect to the a-axis on the a-b plane. These oscillations correspond to geometric changes of the stibazolium chains, leading to changes in the charge distribution and polarisability of the crystal structure on the a-b plane. Thus altering the non linear optical effects of both DAST and DSTMS.
The MD calculations were also performed for both crystals at 150 K and 450 K, and the Fourier transform of stibazolium chain displacements, with the same normalisation value compared to Fig.3, are shown in Fig.4. Fig.4.a) showcases the Fourier transforms of the displacements, parallel to the a-axis, between successive stibazolium cations at 150 K. With comparisons to the 300 K DAST simulation, the spectral bandwidth of the oscillations decreased to the range of 1 - 2 T Hz, concomitant with a doubling of the peak modal amplitude. Meanwhile for DSTMS, we observe a split in the 300 K, 1 - 2 T Hz band into two separate modes at 1.5 T Hz and 2 THz.
The b-axis equivalent of Fig.4.a) is shown in Fig.4.b). Compared to Fig.3.d), the 150 K simulations for both DAST and DSTMS exhibit similar peaks at 1.3 T Hz, 2.2 T Hz and 3 T Hz for DAST and at 1 T Hz and 2 T Hz for DSTMS. These peaks are both more narrow and have higher amplitudes compared to their 300 K counterparts.
In our view, the changes in both Fourier spectra in comparison to their 300 K counterparts are due to the freeze out of vibrational modes as temperature decreases, therefore increasing the amplitude of the fundamental vibrational modes that are not frozen. This suggests that

4

FIG. 3. a) Difference from equilibrium value of centre of mass between the centre of mass of successive anion chains along a-axis for DAST and DSTMS. b) Normalised amplitude of Fourier transform of distance from equilibrium along a-axis. c) Difference from equilibrium value of centre of mass between the centre of mass of successive anion chains along b-axis. d) Normalised amplitude of Fourier transform of distance from equilibrium along b-axis. Both sets of Fourier transforms are normalised to the same value, this permits comparisons of oscillation amplitudes across different crystals and different crystal axes.
the contribution of vibrational excitations are relevant when calculating the electro-optic response of these organic crystals at a temperature of 150 K.
The 450 K MD simulation results are shown in Fig.4.c) for the a-axis and Fig.4.d) for the b-axis. For both crystals and in both axes, we observe a general trend of a broadening in spectral features and an increase in modal amplitude when compared to the 300 K simulation, without the onset of additional vibrational modes.
These results suggest that an increase of temperature from 300 K to 450 K does not unfreeze any additional

FIG. 4. Fourier transform of the relative displacements of the centre of mass of neighbouring cations in DAST and DSTMS, calculated through molecular dynamics with an ionic temperatures of 150 K, shown in a) for displacements along the a-axis and b) along the b-axis, and 450 K, shown in c) for displacements along the a-axis and d) along the b-axis.
vibrational modes. The effect of temperature is only observed as an increase in vibrational amplitude and the increase in vibrational bandwidth.
The transmission of DAST was calculated through Green-Kubo relations and is shown in Fig.5, where the MD time step average transmission is shown in black and the variance of the transmission is shown in grey. The experimentally obtained transmission spectra [25] of DAST is also shown in blue as a comparison.
We observe matching features in both the experimental and calculated transmission at  1 T Hz, 2.5 T Hz and 4.5 T Hz, and troughs at  2.2 T Hz and 3.5 T Hz.

5

FIG. 5. Comparison of calculated time-step averaged transmission of DAST in black, variance in grey, and the experimentally obtained spectra [25] in blue.

linear Green-Kubo relations. This same technique could be extended to designing new materials, in which the electro-optic response of the material could be calculated at a relatively low computational cost.
Through the analysis of the relative displacements of neighbouring cation centres of mass at various temperatures, we were able to identify a freeze out in vibrational modes when decreasing the molecular dynamics simulation temperature from 300 K to 150 K, whilst no additional modes were observed at 450 K. We also observed that the modal amplitudes of DSTMS cation oscillations are generally larger than those of DAST, this suggests that the DSTMS linear electro-optic response has a higher vibrational component when compared to DAST.
The transmission of DAST was also calculated for various time steps in the molecular dynamics simulation through Green-Kubo relations. The calculated spectrum was found to contain similar features compared to experimentally obtained results.

IV. CONCLUSION

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In this work, we investigated a computationally inexpensive method to calculate the THz optical properties of DAST and DSTMS through molecular dynamics and

CW was supported by grant EP/R02992X/1 from the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).

[1] M. Tonouchi, Cutting-edge terahertz technology, Nature Photonics 1, 97 (2007).
[2] P. Jepsen, D. Cooke, and M. Koch, Terahertz spectroscopy and imaging ­ modern techniques and applications, Laser & Photonics Reviews 5, 124 (2011).
[3] J. B. Baxter and G. W. Guglietta, Terahertz spectroscopy, Analytical Chemistry 83, 4342 (2011).
[4] X. Yang, X. Zhao, K. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Fu, and Y. Luo, Biomedical applications of terahertz spectroscopy and imaging, Trends in Biotechnology 34, 810 (2016).
[5] C. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Sun, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, The potential of terahertz imaging for cancer diagnosis: A review of investigations to date, Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and Surgery 2 (2012).
[6] Y. Sun, M. Sy, Y.-X. Wa´ng, A. Ahuja, Y.-T. Zhang, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, A promising diagnostic method: Terahertz pulsed imaging and spectroscopy, World journal of radiology 3, 55 (2011).
[7] Y. Wang, H. Minamide, M. Tang, T. Notake, and H. Ito, Study of water concentration measurement in thin tissues with terahertz-wave parametric source, Opt. Express 18, 15504 (2010).
[8] H. Sarieddeen, N. Saeed, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M. Alouini, Next generation terahertz communications: A rendezvous of sensing, imaging, and localization, IEEE Communications Magazine 58, 69 (2020).
[9] J. F. O'Hara, S. Ekin, W. Choi, and I. Song, A perspective on terahertz next-generation wireless communications, Technologies 7, 10.3390/technologies7020043

(2019). [10] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and C. Han, Terahertz band:
Next frontier for wireless communications, Physical Communication 12, 16 (2014). [11] R. Ulbricht, E. Hendry, J. Shan, T. F. Heinz, and M. Bonn, Carrier dynamics in semiconductors studied with time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 543 (2011). [12] L. Razzari, F. H. Su, G. Sharma, F. Blanchard, A. Ayesheshim, H.-C. Bandulet, R. Morandotti, J.-C. Kieffer, T. Ozaki, M. Reid, and F. A. Hegmann, Nonlinear ultrafast modulation of the optical absorption of intense few-cycle terahertz pulses in n-doped semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B 79, 193204 (2009). [13] P. T. Greenland, S. A. Lynch, A. F. G. van der Meer, B. N. Murdin, C. R. Pidgeon, B. Redlich, N. Q. Vinh, and G. Aeppli, Coherent control of rydberg states in silicon, Nature 465, 1057 (2010). [14] M. Shalaby, C. Vicario, and C. P. Hauri, Extreme nonlinear terahertz electro-optics in diamond for ultrafast pulse switching, APL Photonics 2, 036106 (2017). [15] B. H. Kolner, R. A. Buckles, P. M. Conklin, and R. P. Scott, Plasma characterization with terahertz pulses, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 14, 505 (2008). [16] A. I. McIntosh, B. Yang, S. M. Goldup, M. Watkinson, and R. S. Donnan, Terahertz spectroscopy: a powerful new tool for the chemical sciences?, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41, 2072 (2012). [17] T. Notake, M. Takeda, S. Okada, T. Hosobata, Y. Yam-

6

agata, and H. Minamide, Characterization of all second- [21] C. Bosshard, R. Spreiter, L. Degiorgi, and P. Gu¨nter,

order nonlinear-optical coefficients of organic n-benzyl-2-

Infrared and raman spectroscopy of the organic crystal

methyl-4-nitroaniline crystal, Scientific Reports 9, 14853

dast: Polarization dependence and contribution of molec-

(2019).

ular vibrations to the linear electro-optic effect, Phys.

[18] J. H. Bombile, M. J. Janik, and S. T. Milner, Polaron

Rev. B 66, 205107 (2002).

formation mechanisms in conjugated polymers, Phys. [22] M. Gajdos, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, J. Furthmu¨ller, and

Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 317 (2018).

F. Bechstedt, Linear optical properties in the projector-

[19] R. Spreiter, C. Bosshard, F. Pan, and P. Gu¨nter, High-

augmented wave methodology, Phys. Rev. B 73, 045112

frequency response and acoustic phonon contribution of

(2006).

the linear electro-optic effect in dast, Opt. Lett. 22, 564 [23] L. Mutter, F. D. Brunner, Z. Yang, M. Jazbinsek, and

(1997).

P. Gu¨nter, Linear and nonlinear optical properties of

[20] T. Vijayakumar, I. Hubert Joe, C. P. Reghunad-

the organic crystal dstms, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 24, 2556

han Nair, M. Jazbinsek, and V. S. Jayakumar,

(2007).

Electron­phonon coupling and vibrational modes [24] M. S. Dresselhaus, Solid state physics part ii optical prop-

contributing to linear electro-optic effect of the efficient

erties of solids.

nlo chromophore 4-(n,n-dimethylamino)-n-methyl- [25] C. Vicario, B. Monoszlai, G. Arisholm, and C. P. Hauri,

4'-toluene sulfonate (dast) from their vibrational

Generation of 1.5-octave intense infrared pulses by non-

spectra, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 40, 52 (2009),

linear interactions in DAST crystal, Journal of Optics

https://analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/1170,.10090420/0j5rs(.22007135.).

