arXiv:2106.01611v1 [astro-ph.IM] 3 Jun 2021

Detailed Design of the Science Operations for the XRISM mission
Yukikatsu Teradaa,b,*, Matt Hollandc, Michael Loewensteinc, Makoto Tashiroa,b, Hiromitsu Takahashid, Masayoshi Nobukawae, Tsunefumi Mizunod, Takayuki Tamurab, Shin'ichiro Unof, Shin Watanabeb, Chris Balutac, Laura Burnsc, Ken Ebisawab, Satoshi Eguchig, Yasushi Fukazawad, Katsuhiro Hayashib, Ryo Iizukab, Satoru Katsudaa, Takao Kitaguchih, Aya Kubotai, Eric Millerj, Koji Mukaic, Shinya Nakashimab, Kazuhiro Nakazawak, Hirokazu Odakal, Masanori Ohnod, Naomi Otam, Rie Satob, Yasuharu Sugawarab, Megumi Shidatsun, Tsubasa Tambal, Atsushi Tanimotol, Yuichi Terashiman, Yohko Tsuboio, Yuusuke Uchidad, Hideki Uchiyamap, Shigeo Yamauchim, Tahir Yaqoobc
aSaitama University, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama-shi, Saitama, Japan bJapan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan cNational Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, United States dHiroshima University, School of Science, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan eNara University of Education, Department of Teacher Training and School Education, Nara-shi, Nara, Japan fNihon Fukushi University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Handa, Aichi, Japan gFukuoka University, Faculty of Science Department of Applied Physics, Fukuoka-shi, Fukuoka, Japan hRIKEN, Nishina Center, Wako, Saitama, Japan iShibaura Institute of Technology, Department of Electronic Information Systems, Saitama-shi, Saitama, Japan jMassachusetts Institute of Technology, Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States kNagoya University, Department of Physics, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan lThe University of Tokyo, Department of Physics, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan mNara Women's University, Department of Physics, Nara-shi, Nara, Japan nEhime University, Department of Physics, Matsuyama-shi, Ehime, Japan oChuo University, Department of Physics, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan pShizuoka University, Faculty of Education, Shizuoka-shi, Shizuoka, Japan
Abstract. XRISM is an X-ray astronomical mission led by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), with collaboration from the European Space Agency (ESA) and other international participants, that is planned for launch in 2022 (Japanese fiscal year), to quickly restore high-resolution X-ray spectroscopy of astrophysical objects using the micro-calorimeter array after the loss of Hitomi satellite. In order to enhance the scientific outputs of the mission, the Science Operations Team (SOT) is structured independently from the instrument teams and the Mission Operations Team (MOT). The responsibilities of the SOT are divided into four categories: 1) guest observer program and data distributions, 2) distribution of analysis software and the calibration database, 3) guest observer support activities, and 4) performance verification and optimization activities. Before constructing the operations concept of the XRISM mission, lessons on the science operations learned from past Japanese X-ray missions (ASCA, Suzaku, and Hitomi) are reviewed, and 15 kinds of lessons are identified by categories, such as lessons on the importance of avoiding nonpublic ("animal") tools, coding quality of public tools in terms of both the engineering viewpoint and calibration accuracy, tight communications with instrument teams and operations teams, well-defined task division between scientists and engineers, etc. Among these lessons, a) the importance of early preparation of the operations from the ground stage, b) construction of an independent team for science operations separate from the instrument development, and c) operations with well-defined duties by appointed members are recognized as key lessons for XRISM. Based on this, i) the task division between the mission and science operations and ii) the subgroup structure within the XRISM team are defined in detail as the XRISM Operations Concept. Based on this operations concept, the detailed plan of the science operations is designed as follows. The science operations tasks are shared among Japan, the US, and Europe and are performed by three centers: the Science Operations Center (SOC) at JAXA, the Science Data Center (SDC) at NASA, and European Space Astronomy Centre (ESAC) at the ESA. The SOT is defined as a combination of the SOC and SDC. The SOC is designed to perform tasks close to the spacecraft operations, such as spacecraft planning of science targets, quick-look health checks, pre-
1

pipeline data processing, etc., and the SDC covers tasks regarding data calibration processing (pipeline processing), maintenance of analysis tools, etc. The data-archive and user-support activities are planned to be covered both by the SOC and SDC. Finally, the details of the science operations tasks and the tools for science operations are defined and prepared before launch. This information is expected to be helpful for the construction of science operations of future X-ray missions.
Keywords: The XRISM mission, science operations, operations concept, operations plan.
*Yukikatsu Terada, terada@mail.saitama-u.ac.jp

1 Introduction

The X-Ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission (XRISM)1 is an X-ray astronomical mission led by

the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-

tration (NASA), in collaboration with the European Space Agency (ESA) and other international

partners, that is planned for launch in 2022 (Japanese fiscal year) to restore high-resolution X-ray

spectroscopy after the loss of the Hitomi satellite.2 The XRISM mission has four scientific objec-

tives:3 1) understanding the formation of the structure of the universe and evolution of clusters

of galaxies by measuring turbulent and Doppler velocities at the 300 km/s level in spatially re-

solved spectroscopy of clusters of galaxies, 2) understanding the circulation history of baryonic

matter in the universe from high-resolution spectroscopy of phenomena such as supernova rem-

nants and supernovae, 3) understanding the transport and circulation of energy in the universe

by observing feedback from active galactic nuclei or outflow from super-massive black holes via

high-resolution spectroscopy, and 4) new science based on unprecedented high-resolution X-ray

spectroscopy, such as detailed diagnostics of collisional ionization and photo-ionized plasma. To

meet these scientific objectives of the XRISM mission, the spacecraft and ground systems are de-

signed to use the X-ray micro-calorimeter array Resolve and the X-ray CCD camera Xtend on the

focal planes of the X-ray mirrors, which provide X-ray spectroscopy with a high-energy resolution

of



7

eV

FWHM

within

a

field

of

view

(FOV)

of

29 .

×

29 .

arcmin2

and

imaging

capability

with

a

2

wide FOV of 30 × 30 arcmin2, respectively, in the 0.3 to 12 keV band. This paper focuses on the ground systems of the XRISM mission.
In order to maximize the scientific outputs from the XRISM mission, the science operations of the mission also need to be well designed and performed properly, namely, by conducting a guest observation program operating as a public observatory under a well-supported system of guest observers and providing well-calibrated observational data in the standard format for astronomical use (i.e., flexible image transport system [FITS] format4) with simple and accurate analysis environments and tools.5
This paper aims to describe the details of the development of the XRISM Science Operations from the concept study to the detailed plans, as well as give detailed descriptions of the preparations for the operation (such as science operations manuals, tools, websites, etc) based on the SPIE Proceeding in 2020.6 Note that such descriptions on the detail of design of the science operations may have sensitive topics for the project but the paper aims to describe those as much as possible avoiding confidential technical ideas and political issues for the XRISM project and agencies, because the authors believe that this knowledge may help the design of science operations in nearfuture high-energy missions. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We summarize the lessons learned from past X-ray missions in Section 2 as the first step of the concept study, and summarize the concept of the operations in Section 3. In Sections 4 and 5, the team structure and the details of the science operations plan are summarized, respectively. Finally, Section 6 describes details of preparation of tools in the ground systems for the XRISM Science Operations, and finally we summarize this paper in Section 7.
3

2 Lessons for Science Operations Learned from Previous X-ray Missions 2.1 Summary of Lessons and Their Relations As described in Section 1, the goal of science operations is to enhance or maximize the scientific outputs of the mission. In science missions, the activities required of science operations can be divided into the following four categories.
SO1 Guest Observer (GO) program and data distribution SO2 Distribution of analysis software and calibration database SO3 GO supporting activities SO4 Performance verification and optimization (PVO) activities Many lessons were learned from the science operations in the series of Japanese X-ray satellites, and although some of them require no changes, others need to be addressed before the next mission. Table 1 summarizes the relations among lessons learned from the ASCA,7 Suzaku,8 and Hitomi2 missions, the details of which are described in Sections 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4 below. Positive and negative lessons are marked by + and - identifiers, respectively. Historically, attempts were made to address negative lessons in the next mission. However, this sometimes created another negative situation, which then needed to be solved in a subsequent mission. All of the lessons learned from past X-ray missions were considered by XRISM Science Operations, which are also shown in Table 1 and summarized in Section 2.5 below.
2.2 Lessons Learned from ASCA The ASCA mission was the fourth in the series of Japanese X-ray satellites7 and was launched in 1993 carrying a Gas Imaging Spectrometer and Solid-state Imaging Spectrometer X-ray CCD
4

Table 1 Relations among the lessons learned from ASCA, Suzaku, and Hitomi, summarized by category (SO1, SO2,

SO3, and SO4; Section 2.1). Identifiers such as 1a-ASCA+ and 2ab-Suzaku+ are defined in Sections 2.2, 2.3, and

2.4. The "" mark represents that the following mission continued the activities in the column on the left.

Category

ASCA

Suzaku

Hitomi

XRISM

SO1

1a-ASCA+



1a-Hitomi±



(GO program)

(not activated)

1b-ASCA+







(data distribution)

SO2

2a-ASCA+

2ab-Suzaku+





(tool verification)

(verification,

2b-ASCA-

public tools)





(non-public tools)

2c-Suzaku-

2c-Hitomi+



(software development) (specific team)

2d-Hitomi-

to be fixed

(management)

SO3

3a-ASCA+





(GO support)

3b-ASCA-

3b-Suzaku+

3-Hitomi±



(support center) (Help desk Japan)

(not activated)

3c-Suzaku-

to be fixed

(data access rights)

SO4

4a-ASCA+







(communication

(communication

Japan/US)

Japan/US/ESA)

4b-ASCA+



4b-Hitomi±



(calibration)

(limited calibration)

4c-Suzaku+





(IACHEC)

cameras to observe astrophysical objects in the 0.5­10 keV band. The science operations activities as a public observatory were well established in almost the first collaboration between the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) at current JAXA and NASA/GSFC in the GO program (1a-ASCA+) and the distribution of observation data (1b-ASCA+), analysis software (2a-ASCA+), GO support (3a-ASCA+), and calibration of instruments (4a-ASCA+ and 4b-ASCA+), but there were also two negative items (2b-ASCA- and 3b-ASCA-). The successful parts of ASCA are summarized below.

5

1a-ASCA+: The GO program worked well both in Japan and the US. GOs were able to submit their proposals to agencies, which were reviewed by the scientists and selected based on priorities, and information regarding the approved targets were used by mission operations in Japan. The basic procedures of the GO program were established.
1b-ASCA+: All data products were well managed and distributed to GOs. The backbone of the procedure for processing and archiving observation data was established.
2a-ASCA+: The core algorithms in the analysis software were well verified via onground calibration measurements before launch by instrument teams (ITs). Analysis tools using these algorithms and the calibration database were delivered to GOs. The concept was established in this mission.
3a-ASCA+: As a part of the GO program, user support activities were established. 4a-ASCA+: Collaboration between Japan and US was established on the ASCA sci-
ence operations and was well organized especially on the development of the public software and the calibration database. 4b-ASCA+: The instrument team members performed ground calibrations while scientists both in Japan and US performed continuous in-orbit calibrations, which delivered good calibration accuracy. However, the following items can be regarded as negative lessons provided by this past mission. 2b-ASCA-: The instrument team members developed their own tools for analyzing the ground calibration data, which sometimes provide better results than the pub-
6

lic analysis software released as part of item 2a-ASCA+ in the early GO phase. Since these tools were not initially made public, they became referred to as "animal software" because of the unfairness of the analyses from the viewpoint of a public observatory, although this unfair situation was resolved in the final version of the products. 3b-ASCA-: GO support was provided only in the US by the US ASCA Guest Observer Facility (GOF), but not in Japan, although instrument teams in Japan provided deep support for the GOF activity. The interface to GOs existed only in the US.
2.3 Lessons Learned from Suzaku The Suzaku mission was the fifth in the series of the Japanese X-ray satellites in collaboration between JAXA and NASA,8 and was launched in 2005 carrying the High-throughput X-ray Telescope, X-ray Imaging Spectrometer CCD cameras, and non-imaging Hard X-ray Detector. The science operations members of Suzaku tried to utilize the positive lessons from ASCA (i.e., on the GO program and data distribution 1a-ASCA+ and 1b-ASCA+, the software development 2aASCA+, the GO support 3a-ASCA+, and the PVO activities 4a-ASCA+ and 4b-ASCA+) and fix the negative situations (2b-ASCA- and 3b-ASCA-). They successfully fixed these using 2abSuzaku+ and 3b-Suzaku+, respectively, which are summarized below.
2ab-Suzaku+: In order to keep the positive situation 2a-ASCA+ and solve negative situation 2b-ASCA- (i.e., avoiding animal software), the public tools and tools for ground calibration measurements were designed to have the core algorithms for calculating variables such as time, pulse-height invariant (PI9), and grade, 7

shared as software libraries. The instrument team members developed and verified these core libraries via hardware development, and the same libraries were smoothly exported into public tools that could be used by the GOs. Therefore, the public tools were well verified and well calibrated. 3b-Suzaku+: In order to improve situation 3b-ASCA-, a Suzaku Help Desk in Japan (RIKEN)10 were operated in addition to the Suzaku GOF in the US. Since several members of the Suzaku Help Desk also belong to the instrument teams in Japan, these two bodies had a strong potential for solving questions from GOs very quickly because of their tight connection to the operation team and developers of instruments.
In addition, starting from Suzaku, communication was established with other X-ray missions in terms of calibration activities (keeping 4b-ASCA+), as indicated as 4c-Suzaku+ below.
4c-Suzaku+: The Suzaku instrument members participated from the beginning in crosscalibration activities in the International Astrophysical Consortium for High Energy Calibration (IACHEC).11
However, the following two negative points related to 2ab-Suzaku+ and 3b-Suzaku+ arose in the Suzaku Science Operations, and were left as open issues for the next mission (Hitomi).
2c-Suzaku-: Software development by the instrument teams in 2ab-Suzaku+ caused a) unexpected software freezes and b) delays in the delivery schedule, because a) not all the instrument members were experts on programming, and b) the first priority of the instrument teams was the delivery and maintenance of the detector itself, with software development having a lower priority. 8

3c-Suzaku-: The members of the Suzaku Help Desk in Japan (3b-Suzaku+) were not appointed by the agency and had no special data-access permission. Therefore, the tasks were performed on a best-effort basis and sometimes activity stopped because of other business.
2.4 Lessons Learned from Hitomi The Hitomi mission was the sixth in the series of Japanese X-ray satellites developed at JAXA in collaboration with NASA and Japanese and Canadian institutions with contribution from the ESA,2 and carried an micro X-ray calorimeter array and X-ray CCD cameras on the focal plane of X-ray mirrors, as well as hard X-ray instruments with hard X-ray mirrors and a soft gamma-ray detector. The satellite was successfully launched in February 2016, but contact with the spacecraft was lost in March 2016 owing to problems in the bus system before the performance verification (PV) phase. Therefore, most of the science operations after launch were not activated, as indicated by 1a-Hitomi±, 3-Hitomi±, and 4-Hitomi± below.
1a-Hitomi±: Opportunity for calling for GO proposals was canceled, although the distribution of the in-orbit data was completed (keeping 1b-ASCA+).
3-Hitomi±: GO support helpdesks were prepared but not activated. 4b-Hitomi±: Calibration of instruments was performed on the ground and partially
in orbit during the commissioning phase, and the results were released in the calibration database.
In the science operations of Hitomi, positive lessons from ASCA and Suzaku were kept in the activities under the above situations, including participation in the IACHEC (4c-Suzaku+). In
9

parallel, the science operations members tried to solve negative item 2c-Suzaku- (leaving 3cSuzaku- open when the mission terminated), and it was solved as 2c-Hitomi+ with 2d-Hitomi- left as an open issue as shown below.
2c-Hitomi+: In order to avoid 2c-Suzaku- (unexpected software freeze and schedule delay), a specific team was defined for the development of software and the calibration database. The team was the Hitomi software and calibration team (SCT) and was independent from the instrument teams and consisted of scientists and programmers. As a result, there were no delays in the schedule of software preparation and no delay in the release of tools and the calibration database. The products were well calibrated using instrument-specific methods,12­21 because all the algorithms were imported into the analysis software and the latest calibration information was quickly released in the database.5
2d-Hitomi-: In order to achieve 2c-Hitomi+, there were many interactions among the software and calibration team, instrument teams, and operation teams, which were spread across multiple agencies. Therefore, many more tasks than expected were required in order to manage tasks such as the schedule, manpower of activities, and interfaces.
2.5 Recommendations for XRISM Science Operations In summary, from the lessons learned from ASCA, Suzaku, and Hitomi missions, two items labeled 2d-Hitomi- (team management issues) and 3c-Suzaku- (data access rights in users support) remain as open items for the XRISM Science Operations, with the remaining items recommended to
10

remain unchanged. The two items are related to the management of manpower and the preparation of science operations before launch. 3 Concept for the XRISM Science Operations Based on the lessons learned from the past X-ray missions and recommendations for XRISM operations (Section 2), we established the XRISM Operations Concept, as described in this section. 3.1 Key points of the XRISM Operations Concept Considering the recommendations from lessons learned from past X-ray missions (Section 2), the key points of the XRISM Operations Concept can be summarized into the following three items.
OC01 Clear division between spacecraft operations (hereafter, "mission operations") and science operations is required so that the scientists can concentrate on science operations.
OC02 The plans for the operations (both mission and science operations), including the team structure and interfaces, should be defined in an early phase before launch. Similarly, training and actual operations should start before launch.
OC03 All members of the operations (both mission and science operations) should be appointed by the agencies, and all activities, except for PVO activities (see Section 2.1), should be performed as well-defined tasks with clear due dates, that continue to work until the end of the mission.
11

3.2 Task Division between Mission Operations and Science Operations In operations concept OC01, operations tasks that require scientific decisions from the viewpoints of scientists are all assigned as XRISM Science Operations, and all other tasks are assigned as XRISM Mission Operations. For example, the weekly negotiation of contact passes of ground stations, generation of daily operation commands, execution of the spacecraft simulator, downlink-and-command operations at ground stations, and checking the house-keeping telemetries from the spacecraft in real-time and off-line are assigned as tasks for mission operations. On the other hand, the handling of proposals from GOs, scientific scheduling of astrophysical objects, quicklook checks of science telemetries, instrument calibration activities1, and the management of daily data process and archive operations and user support activities are considered tasks for science operations.
We defined individual teams for performing XRISM Mission Operations and XRISM Science Operations separately, which are called the Mission Operations Team (MOT) and Science Operations Team (SOT), respectively. Following the lessons of 2c-Hitomi+, these teams also need to be independent from the instrument teams. In addition, we defined the Science Management Office (SMO) to manage the overall XRISM Science Operations for deciding items regarding science operations. For example, the SMO handles activities such as calling for, reviewing, and selecting GO proposals, and approving targets for director time-of-opportunity (ToO) observations.
3.3 Operation Phases and Team Structure In operations concept OC02, the operation phases of the XRISM are defined as follows.
1. Before Proto-Flight Test (PFT) Phase
1However, the calibration activities were shared among XRISM-internal groups, as described later in Section 5.
12

2. PFT Phase 3. Launch Preparation Phase & Launch Phase 4. Initial Phase, which consists of the Critical Operations Period and Commission-
ing Period 5. Nominal Operations Phase, which consists of the Initial-Calibration and Performance-
Verification (PV) Period and Nominal Observation Period 6. Latter Phase, which consists of the Latter Observation Period and Completion of
Operations
Based on concept C02, the phase in which science operations starts should be the 2) PFT Phase, not the 5) Nominal Operations Phase after launch. In other words, preparation of the mission and science operations should be completed before the PFT Phase on the ground, and the MOT and SOT shall start from the PFT Phase. Therefore, we define the Mission Operations Planning Team (MOPT) for preparing the mission and science operations (e.g., construction of the detailed operations plan, preparation of the OTs and ground system), which is active from the 1) Before PFT Phase.
According to operations concept OC03, all members of the MOT and SOT should be appointed by the agencies (JAXA or NASA), and work on well-defined tasks under a managed schedule until the end of the mission, although members of the MOPT may be non-appointed members from universities as developers of tools in the Before PFT Phase. The SOT members consist of not only leader(s) and senior scientists, but also young scientists, referred to as Duty Scientists, who perform the actual XRISM Science Operations and are appointed by the agencies. In our concept, the tasks of the Duty Scientists should be defined such as to provide a good career path for young
13

scientists. Note that the concept of the Duty Scientists is applied only on the science operations center in Japan as described in the next section 4.
4 Design of the Team and Management Structure of the XRISM Science Operations Based on operations concepts OC01, OC02, and OC03 in Section 3, we defined the details of the structure of the SOT and the interfaces and task divisions among the subgroups of the XRISM team, which are described in this section.
4.1 Interface Structure Between Subgroups and the SOT In addition to the SOT, MOT, and SMO described in Section 3, the XRISM team consists of the instrument teams, namely, the Resolve and Xtend teams, and the In-flight Calibration Planning Team (IFCP),22 which provides the detailed plans for in-orbit calibration observations before launch. Interactions between these subgroups after the PFT Phase (Section 3.3) are summarized in Figure 1.
The SOT is directed by the Project Manager (PM), and works with the SMO, which provides recommendations and specifications for science operations as established in the concept study in Section 3. The SOT does not communicate directly with the Science Advisory Committee, but rather through the SMO. The SOT communicates with the MOT regarding tasks such as the planning of spacecraft operation, verification of telemetry data, and reports. Several tasks such as in-orbit calibration observations and instrument performance monitoring are performed in collaboration with the Resolve, Xtend, and IFCP teams. The SOT communicates with GOs directly regarding the acceptance of proposals and user support activities. Communications with other observatories (i.e., X-ray missions and/or observatories in other wavelengths), negotiations for in-
14

recommendation specification
report
direct

XRISM

Project Manager
direct

MOT

report etc plan etc

SMO

Science Community

report

XRISM Science

recommendation Adovisory Committee

collaboration

plan/schedule

Observatories

collaboration
Resolve Team

Xtend Team

collaboration

SOT

data, support proposal, question

XRISM Users

collaboration
IFCP (on ground)

press release support

Public

Fig 1 Interactions between the SOT and other internal subgroups in the XRISM team after the PFT Phase. The scientific community and public are also shown on the right.

orbit calibration campaigns, and/or multi-wavelength scientific programs are handled by the SMO,

and communications on actual observation plans/schedules are handled by the SOT. Similarly, de-

cisions regarding press releases of scientific outputs or mission status are made by the SMO, and

the actual work of the publications is done by the SOT members under the direction of the SMO.

The calibration activities of payload instruments consist of many steps, and the task divisions

among the SOT, instrument teams, and IFCP team are defined as Table 2.

4.2 SOT Structure and Task Divisions
The XRISM Science Operations are covered by JAXA, NASA, and the ESA. Since tight collaboration between JAXA and NASA is required for preparation and maintenance of the data distribution (SO1 in Section 2.1) and analysis software and the calibration database (SO2 in Section 2.1), the SOT is designed to operate at the Science Operations Center (SOC) at JAXA and the Science Data Center (SDC)23 at NASA, as shown in Figure 2. Each center is made up of leads, scientists, and

15

Table 2 Task division among the SOT, ITs, and IFCP team on the calibration activities.

Calibration Tasks

Subgroup Name

Preparation of calibration requirement

ITs

Review calibration requirement from viewpoint SOT

of flow down from mission science objectives

Ground calibration tests

ITs and

bus company on timing system

Analyses of ground calibration data

ITs with SOT and

bus company with SOT on timing system

Prepare pre-launch calibration database

ITs with SOT

Release pre-launch calibration database

SOT

Preparation of in-orbit calibration plan

IFCP

Schedule of in-orbit calibration targets

SOT

Spacecraft operation of in-orbit calibration targets MOT

Analyses of in-orbit calibration data

SOT and ITs

with PVO contributor

Preparation of calibration database

SOT and ITs

Release calibration database

SOT

 The IFCP team is active before launch.  The PVO contributors are defined in Figure 3 in Section 4.3.

software engineers. In the SDC, the Product Development Lead and the Science Lead direct the

SDC internal groups, namely, the Data Center Team, Guest Observer Facility, and User Support

Group. The SOC is activated after the PFT Test Phase (see Section 3.3), and the SOC Lead directs

SOC members, such as the Duty Scientists defined in Section 3.3 and Supporting Scientists from

the MOPT, after the PFT Phase. Before launch, the science part of the MOPT is also under the

direction of the SOC Lead, and consists of three groups: the Process and Plan Group, the PVO

Group, and the User Support Group. In addition, the ESA operates the European Space Astron-

omy Center (ESAC) from the Before-PFT Phase and communicates with the SOC and SDC for

the science operations in Europe.

The task divisions among the three centers in JAXA, NASA, and ESA are defined in Table 3,

summarized into four categories (SO1, SO2, SO3, and SO4 in Section 2.1). The details of these

tasks are described in the next Section 5.

16

Science Operations Team (SOT)

Science Data Center (SDC)
SDC Product Development Lead SDC Science Lead

Data Center Team
Pipeline Lead, Developer
Archive Lead Analyses Tools Lead CALDB Lead Xtend Lead

Guest Observer Facillity and User Support
Lead GO Support

Science Operations Center (SOC) SOC Lead

Duty Scientists SOT Scheduler (as SDC) Supporting Scientists JAXA academic staff Graduate students (as interns)

Mision Operation Planning Team (prep for SOC part / on ground)
Process & Plan Group Lead, Developer
Performance Verification Optimization Group Lead, Developer
User Support Group Lead, Developer

4.3 Management structure

Fig 2 Structure of the SOT.

All specifications of the overall science operations are handled by the SMO, and therefore, the Mission Principal Investigator (PI) and co-PI (JAXA/NASA), Project Scientists (JAXA/NASA/ESA), Deputy Project Scientists (JAXA/NASA/ESA), and all the leaders of the internal subgroups (SOT and Resolve, Xtend, and IFCP teams) except for the MOT in Figure 1 belong to the SMO Committee in the Nominal Operations Phase, as shown in Figure 3. The Project Managers both in JAXA and NASA also belong to the SMO as ex officio. Before launch, chairs of the science categories, which are active in the selection of the PV targets, and chairs of subgroups for specific topics such as atomic physics also participate in the SMO.
Following concept C03 in Section 3.1, the members marked by in Figure 3 are appointed by the agencies, namely, JAXA or NASA (or the ESA). Within the SOT, the SOC plans to have eight Duty Scientists (see Section 3.3), as well as Support Scientists from the MOPT (Section 3.3) and/or JAXA academic positions to help the Duty Scientists, as described in Section 4.2. In the SDC, more than seven staff scientists and more than four software engineers will perform the science operations at NASA. All members of the SOC and SDC are appointed by JAXA and NASA, respectively, in the Nominal Operations Phase.

17

Table 3 Task Division between SOC, SDC, and ESAC in the XRISM Science Operations.

Category

SOC

SDC

ESAC

SO1 Proposal support (JAXA) Proposal support (US/Canada)

Proposal support (Europe)

(GO) - Web pages for Submission - Web pages for submission

- Web pages for submission

- Proposing systems and tools

- Proposal support

- Proposal support

- Proposal support

- Supporting review process - Supporting review process

- Supporting review process

(Data) Observation scheduling

Observation scheduling

- Planning operations

- Planning operations

- ToO handling

- Planning tools and personnel

- MOT interface

Pre-pipeline process

Pipeline process

(No data process)

- Format conversion

- Filling calibrated columns

- Observation database

- Metadata for archive

Archiving at JAXA

Archiving at NASA

(no archive)

- Data archive

- Data archive

- Quick-viewing tool

- Calibration database release

- Quick-viewing tool

SO2 Telemetry check

Development of analysis tools

(Software) - Health check

- Performance check

Maintenance of calibration database

SO3 User support (JAXA)

User support (US/Canada)

User support (Europe)

(Support) - Handling GO questions - Handling GO questions

- Handling GO questions

- User guide documents

- User guide documents

- Documentation

- Researcher webpages

- HEASARC webpage

- ESARC webpage

- EPO support

- EPO support

- EPO support

SO4 Calibration operations

Calibration support

(PVO) - Analyses

- Analyses

- Monthly plan

Performance check

Performance check

Performance check

- Analysis threads

- Analysis threads

- Analysis threads

- Daily/monthly check

- Post-process development

Xtend Transient search

4.4 Data Access Policy for Science Operations

In the science operations performed by the SOT, SOT members have access to all of the telemetry items including scientific properties in order to check the performance of the instruments and to make quick-look reports to GOs. These activities are limited to monitoring or checking of the instrument health and performance, and do not extend to performing scientific analyses of the scientific interests of scientists. The SOT members also check all the proposals approved

18

ex-officio of SMO Project Manager

SMO
Mission PI/Co-PI SMO Chair
Project Scientists Duputy Project Scientists
SMO steering

direct

direct

direct

direct

SOT SOT Leads

Xtend Team Xtend PI

Resolve Team Resolve PI

Participating Scientists
in PV Period

in Nominal Operations Phase
Project Engineer MOT
MOT Lead

direct report

direct report recommendation specification
direct report direct report direct report

Time Allocation Committee

SOC
Duty Scientists Supporing Sci. SOT Scheduler Students
SDC
Scientists Engineers

Calibration Scientists

Calibration Scientists

PVO Contributor (scientist)

MOT Operator

Fig 3 Organization structure of the XRISM Science Operations during the Nominal Operation Phase.

by the SMO and their scientific justifications. While SOT members can access all the data and

products to the extent that such access is required to perform their duties, they are required to

maintain confidentiality of all scientific knowledge obtained in this context. The SOT members

shall understand this data access policy in all of the science operations.

5 Details of the Science Operations Plan Following operations concept OC02 (Section 3.1), the detailed plan of the XRISM Science Operations is constructed as described in the following sections under the team structure defined in Section 4, well before the launch during the Before PFT Phase (Section 3.3).

5.1 Summary of the Science Operations Scenario All the tasks for the XRISM Science Operations are defined in terms of the four types of science operations defined in Section 2.1 (i.e., SO1, SO2, SO3, and SO4) in Table 4, which can be categorized into the following three-step operation flow.
Step-1: Proposal and Planning Step (before observation)

19

Step-2: Telemetry Check and Data Processing and Archive Step (after daily spacecraft observation)
Step-3: User Support and PVO Step (after distribution of the observational data to GOs)
These steps are performed in parallel with observations, and are operated both by the SOT and MOT, with various timescales (once per year, monthly, weekly, daily, and continuous), as also shown in Table 4. The tasks for the SOC in Japan (see Table 3) are shared among the Duty Scientists and the SOT Scheduler (who works on planning as a contribution from SDC staying at SOC; Figures 2 and 3) evenly by week or month. For example, one Duty Scientist performs the first task, which is then performed by another Duty Scientist the following week.
5.2 Details of Tasks in Step-1 Before Observation Most of the tasks in Step-1 before observation are of Type SO1 (defined in Section 2.1), which can be divided into the following two categories. The details are as follows.
· GO proposal support ­ The SOT supports calls for proposals by the SMO and receives proposals from GOs. During proposal acceptance, the SOT supports GOs with preparation of proposals (SO3). ­ After the review process, the SOT gets a prioritized approved target list from the SMO. In parallel, the in-orbit calibration objects are merged into the list. The SOT puts information regarding approved targets and calibration objects into the observation database and opens the list via the webpages of the researchers. 20

Table 4 Tasks for XRISM Science Operations for the steps of observations (see the text in Section 5.1) in the Nominal

Operations Phase. Types of science operations are defined in Section 2.1.

Step Type Category (frequency)

Tasks

Subgroup

Step-1 SO1 GO proposal support Call for proposals, receive proposals

SOT

SO1 (year)

Support GO proposals

SOT

SO3

Support review process

SOT

SO1

Handle approved target

SOT

SO1 Observation planning In-orbit calibration planning

SOT

SO1 (monthly, weekly, daily) ToO handling

SOT

SO1

Observation scheduling (long/short term)

SOT

SO1

Coordination of observations

SOT

SO1

MOT I/F for operation command generation SOT

NA N/A Spacecraft operation

MOT

(daily)

Step-2 SO2 Telemetry check

Process quick-look data (QLDP)

MOT

SO2 (daily)

Health check

MOT,SOT

SO4

Instrument performance check

SOT

SO1 Data process

Format conversion (PPL)

MOT, SOT

SO1 (daily)

Calculate calibrated columns (PL)

SOT

SO1

Observation database/Archive Metadata

MOT,SOT

SO2

Product check

SOT

SO1

User notification

MOT

SO1 Archive

Data publication

MOT

(daily)

Step-3 SO3 User support

Researcher webpages

SOT

SO3 (daily)

Handling GO questions

SOT

SO3

Documentation

SOT

SO3

EPO support

SOT

SO4 PVO activities

Calibration analyses

SOT

SO4 (daily)

Monthly performance check

SOT

SO4

Development of Analysis threads and tools

SOT

SO4

Xtend transient search

SOT

· Observation planning

­ After the SOT obtains the list of targets, the SOT Scheduler (defined in section 5.1) generates a long-term operation plan taking into account the spacecraft operational constraints.
­ Using the long-term plan as a guide, the SOT generates a more detailed short-term observation schedule weekly and prepares the detailed plans for

21

observations for the week. ­ During preparation of the observation details, the SOT notifies the obser-
vation PI of the plan, and negotiates the hardware configuration with the instrument teams. ­ In addition to the planned objects, the SOT handles ToO proposals from GOs. If the SMO approves a ToO proposal, the short-term operation plan is quickly updated and used for the spacecraft operations. ­ Before spacecraft operations, the SOT acts as an interface to the MOT from SMO and GOs on scientific topics for the generation of operation commands to the spacecraft.
5.3 Details of Tasks in Step-2 After Observation The tasks in Step-2 after observation are a mixture of Types SO1, SO2, and SO4 (Section 2.1), and can be divided into the following three categories. The details are as follows.
· Telemetry check ­ Telemetry from the spacecraft needs to be checked quickly after spacecraft operation. In order to quickly perform these telemetry checks before the official data processing for GOs, which takes about one or two weeks in total, a Quick-look Data Process (QLDP) is defined to generate products quickly. The QLDP simplifies the timing calibration, orbit determination, and attitude determination processes from the official data processing.
22

­ The MOT executes the QLDP and performs the quick health checks of instruments using the housekeeping telemetry semi-automatically. This function checks every value of the attribute in the engineering housekeeping telemetry to verify the proper and safe operation of the observatory at all times. If the MOT find an anomalous telemetry for the spacecraft safety from this limit checks, they will respond immediately as an emergency operation. In any cases, the MOT reports the results to the SOT daily after the spacecraft operation.
­ In addition to the engineering health checks by the MOT, further checks of the performance of payload instruments from a scientific viewpoint are also required for the SOT. The SOT uses the products from QLDP of not only the housekeeping telemetry but also the science telemetry, performs the pipeline-equivalent process to calculate data such as the time, coordinate, and energy information, and then checks the instrument performance.
· Data Process ­ After spacecraft operation, telemetry is converted into the FITS format4 by the pre-pipeline (PPL) process, and then higher-level calculations, such as filling time, coordinate, and energy information (PI9), are performed by the pipeline (PL) process. (Note that the details of the PPL and PL are described later in Section 6.2.1.) The products of the PPL and PL are archived and distributed to GOs. Execution of the PPL and PL is performed by the MOT supported by the SOC and the SDC, respectively.
23

­ The products of the PPL and PL are checked by the SOT before the distribution to GOs.
· Archive ­ The products of the PPL and PL checked by the SOT are archived both in JAXA and NASA archive centers, the Data ARchive and Transmission System (DARTS) and the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (HEASARC), respectively. ­ When the products are archived, the SOT notifies the readiness to GOs.
5.4 Details of Tasks in Step-3 After Data Distribution The tasks in Step-3 after data distribution are of Types SO3 and SO4 (defined in Section 2.1), which can be divided into the following two categories. The details are as follows.
· User Support ­ The SOT prepares and operates webpages for GOs to provide information on GO proposals, operation schedules and logs, analysis documents, etc. Such researcher website for XRISM are prepared at the three agencies, JAXA, NASA, and ESA, separately but main contents are synchronized. ­ The SOT operates the agency Help Desks for handling questions from GOs. ­ The SOT prepares documents related to the data analyses of XRISM, such as analysis walkthrough, analysis manuals, and descriptions of instruments. ­ Education and Public Outreach (EPO) activities are performed by other institutes in JAXA or NASA, and the SOT supports such activities for XRISM. 24

· PVO Activities ­ As defined in the task division of the calibration activities in Table 2, the SOT calibrates payload instruments regularly with the instrument teams using the in-orbit calibration targets or trend archive data (i.e., non-scientific data obtained for performance monitoring, such as data during earth occultation of normal operations). ­ In addition to the daily performance checks in Step-2, the SOT also monitors the instrument performance monthly. ­ The SOT enhances the instrument performance (such as improving the pointing accuracy and tuning of the good time interval) by checking short-/longterm trends and correlations between telemetry items and performance parameters. The output of such performance enhancement activities are implemented as an analysis thread or a new analysis tool, which is provided to GOs via the researcher website or the software archive. ­ During the daily data checks in Step-2 (Table 4), the SOT carries out further analyses to search for possible new transient objects within the field of view of Xtend using the quick-look data products and the final products. If the SOT finds a transient and the SMO considers it worth reporting, the SOT posts a quick report to the Astronomers Telegram (ATEL, http://www.astronomerstelegram.org/) from quick-look data products, and updates the detailed information using the final products if necessary. This activity is performed during the Initial-Calibration and PV
25

Period under the permission of the observation PI during the Nominal Observation Period.
6 Preparation for Science Operations on the Ground Following the science operations plan in Section 5, the MOPT (Section 3.2) prepares science operations well before the launch along the timeline of the science operations (Section 6.1): i.e., the MOPT prepares the OTs for science operations (Section 6.2), science operations manual, and website (Section 6.3), and performs the PVO activities from before launch (Section 6.4). This section describes the preparation status at the end of the 1) Before PFT Phase (see Section 3.3) on the ground.
6.1 Timeline of the Science Operations Preparation In each operation phases defined in Section 3.3, the MOPT and SOT prepare and/or perform the science operations following the timeline shown in Table 5, respectively. Before the launch, on ground, the MOPT prepares the descriptions for science operations, such as the science operations plan, the manual for the science operations, and the detail design of the operation tools (OTs), etc, and develops and verifies the OTs in the before PFT phase, and then trains the SOT members in the PFT phase. The list of targets to be observed during the initial-calibration and PV period in the Nominal operations phase (Section 3.3) is released during this phase. After the launch of the satellite, the SOT supports the critical and commissioning operations by the MOT and ITs during the initial operations phase, prepares the data process of the first light object at the end of commissioning period, and, after that, performs the nominal operations in the Normal Operations Phase.
26

Table 5 Timeline of the XRISM science operations.The type of science operations are defined in Section 2.1, the CP()

represents the calibration plan of instruments, and the ERS() represents the Early Release Science targets in the PV

period.)

Phase

XRISM

SO1

SO2

SO3

SO4

(GO, Data)

(Software)

(Support)

(PVO)

Before PFT Reviews

Prepare science operations plan and manual

Review CP

Design and verify OTs

Release PV list

Open webpages Prepare IFCP

PFT

PFT

Verify OTs

Process data Update Guide

Update manual Update manual Update webpages

end-to-end

Training Science Operations members

Launch

launch

Preparation of call for proposal Update webpages

Release 1st version of XRISM software and calibration database

Initial

Critical Period

Internal process Check telemetry

Commissioning Period

Internal process Check telemetry Update webpages

First light

Process data

Press release

Nominal Initial-Calibration/PV Period

Process data Check telemetry

Calibration

ERS

Release ERS

Update webpages Search transient

Preparation of call for proposal

Nominal observation Period

Process data Check telemetry Update webpages Calibration

Release PV/GO

Helpdesk

Search transient

Preparation of call for proposal

Release/update XRISM software and calibration database

Latter

Observation Continue the activities in the Nominal Operations Phase

6.2 Tools for Science Operations and Detailed Designs

The tools and database required for the XRISM Science Operations by the steps (Section 5.1) are summarized in Table 6. The responsibilities for these tools/databases in the subgroups within the SOT are also shown. Among these 10 OTs, the proposal submission tools, planning tool, PL, calibration database, and analysis tools (OT01, OT02, OT06, OT07, and OT09, respectively) are developed by the SDC, and the details of these OTs are described in Loewenstein et. al. (2020).23 Hereafter, this paper describes the details of the observation database, QLDP, PPL, and archive quick-viewing tool (OT03, OT04, OT05, OT08) in Section 6.2 and the conversion tools for the

27

researcher webpages (OT10) in Section 6.3.

Tool ID OT01 OT02 OT03 OT04 OT05 OT06 OT07 OT08 OT09 OT10

Table 6 List of science OTs and databases. Steps are defined in Section 5.1.

Tools/Database

Step

SOT subgroups

Proposal submission tools

Step-1

SDC, (SOC, ESAC as users)

Planning tools

Step-1

SDC with SOC

Observation database

Step-1,2

SOC

QLDP

Step-2

SOC

PPL

Step-2

SOC

PL

Step-2

SDC

Calibration database

Step-2,3

SDC with SOC and ITs

Archive quick-viewing tool

Step-2

SOC, (HEASARC), ESAC

Analysis tools

Step-3

SDC with SOC and ITs

Conversion tools for researcher webpages Step-1, -2, and -3 SOC

6.2.1 Pre-pipeline and Pipeline Process
Since the raw telemetry from the spacecraft is a collection of space packets, which are unreadable by the standard analyis tools used in high energy astronomy, they need to be converted into the standard FITS format4 for distribution to GOs, as described in Angelini et al. (2018).5 In addition, the GOs need calibrated information on variables such as time, coordinates, and pulse height invariant (PI;9 energy information), which are filled in by the data processing. This corresponds to the the functions of a) format conversion and b) filling calibration columns. The data processing is divided into two steps, PPL (OT05 in Table 6) and PL (OT06 in Table 6) as shown in Figure 4 to archive functions a) and b), respectively.
The raw telemetry from the spacecraft is stored in the SIRIUS database, and all the information regarding approved targets, instrument configuration, and other spacecraft information are stored in the observation database (ODB in Figure 4; OT03 in Table 6). The PPL accesses the SIRIUS database via the Space Data Transfer Protocol (SDTP) to retrieve the telemetry and first converts the telemetries into a raw packet telemetry (RPT) file, which is a simple dump of the series of space
28

QL Data Process
OT04

SIRIUS
SDTP protocol
Raw Packet Telemetry FITS (RPT)

Spacecraft Operation
OT03
Observation Database (ODB)
SIB2 Database

PPL tool

OT05 Pre-Pipeline (PPL)

First FITS File (FFF)

Private

PL tool (mission ftools)
OT09
Second FITS File (SFF)
Mission independent
ftools

OT07
Calibration Database (CALDB)
Selection criteria

OT06 Pipeline (PL)

Public/Archive
FITS Products for Archive

Fig 4 Schematic view of the flow of data processing for the XRISM (and Hitomi, Suzaku) in Step-2 and OTs.
packets in the variable-length FITS format, using the information from the observation database (OT03). In the second step, the PPL interprets the telemetry attributes in the space packets using the telemetry-description database, shown as the "Spacecraft Information Base version 2 (SIB2) database" in Figure 4, and converts the RPT into the First FITS Files (FFFs) with meaningful columns. The FITS header keywords of FFFs represent the instrument configurations as identified from the telemetry and observation database. After the PPL process, the PL fills in the calibration columns, such as time, coordinates, and PI, using the FITS tools called ftools in the HEASOFT XRISM package released from HEASARC by using the calibration database (denoted as "CALDB" in Figure 4; OT07 in Table 6), and stores them in the Second FITS Files (SFFs). The PL process then continues to extract the cleaned-event FITS for analyses from the SFFs by deleting low-quality

29

events and by selecting good-time intervals. The key point of this procedure is that the FFFs have the same format as SFFs (i.e., FITS
columns for time, coordinates, and PI are already prepared as blank columns in the FFF stage) and the CALDB and ftools are all distributed to GOs (i.e., public), so that the GOs can reprocess the SFF with the latest calibration information by themselves. This concept was established in the Suzaku Science Operations, and also used in Hitomi successfully. The XRISM data process also follows this procedure.
The PPL requires inputs from the mission operation information, such as the definition of the telemetry format, the orbital estimation, the attitude determination, the time calibration, etc. Therefore, the PPL software for the XRISM mission is prepared and executed by the SOC at JAXA, where the mission operations are performed and the operation information is easily accessible from the SOT. The FFFs are then sent via a data transfer system protocol (DTS2) to the SDC, and processed in the PL at the SDC, as already described in the task division (Section 4.2).
6.2.2 Design of Tools for the PPL and QLDP
Since the QLDP (OT04 in Table 6; Section 5.3) is the simplified version of the PPL (OT05), these tools can be shared with each other just by switching the execution mode. The PPL and QLDP are designed to have a structure consisting of three stages of tool, modules, and top-level script, as shown in Figure 5, and the difference between PPL and QLDP is designed to be absorbed in the top-level script. A tool is the smallest unit of the software code, and a module is a collection of tools to achieve one function (for example, generation of RPT, generation of time calibration fits, etc.). The top-level script controls the process flow of multiple modules using the configuration
2https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/dts/
30

files, with which the detail flow of PPL or QLDP are described. Since XRISM is a recovery mission for Hitomi, the tools have already been developed and
verified and can be reused for XRISM. However, the Hitomi PPL is not easy to maintain because the Hitomi SCT (section 2.4) were forced to use it during the Commissioning Phase for the unplanned spacecraft problems, and the Hitomi PPL has many patches for complex hardware modes during the Commissioning Phase, even though it was well designed for use in the Nominal Operations Phase. Therefore, the MOPT decided to re-organize the PPL flow diagram and to newly develop the modules and top-level script for XRISM.

Tool Tool

Tool Tool Tool

Tool

Tool Tool Tool

Module

Module

Module

...

Module

Top Level Script (xappl) Fig 5 Structure of the PPL and QLDP.

Configuration Files

In detail, the MOPT defined the following 14 modules corresponding to the 14 functions required for the PPL and QLDP of XRISM. Using these modules, the typical flow diagrams for the PPL and QLDP in the flight configuration are designed as shown in Figures 6 and 7, respectively. In addition, the MOPT also identified 17 use cases for the ground tests and operations in orbit.
1. Data processing setup module 2. Raw telemetry packet processing module 3. Spacecraft-bus data processing module

31

4. Resolve data processing module 5. Xtend data processing module 6. Time calibration data processing module 7. Time assignment process/library 8. Attitude data processing module 9. Orbit data processing module 10. Operation-command data processing module 11. Good-time-interval generation and slew/pointing-division module 12. Common header management module 13. Observation-database interface module 14. Package processing module
6.2.3 Design of Tools for the Archive Quick-Viewing Tool
For the data archive for XRISM, it is important to define the division of tasks between the XRISM project and the archive centers of the agencies. In the archive activity at JAXA, the MOPT defined the task division between the SOT and the Center for Science Satellite Operation and Data Archive (C-SODA) at ISAS/JAXA, as summarized in Table 7. In principle, content is provided by the XRISM project and preparation of mission-independent systems and infrastructure are made by C-SODA at ISAS/JAXA.
Among the tasks by the SOT, the data preparation tasks (Table 7) are performed by the PPL and related tools OT05, and the project introduction page and public data list tasks are performed
32

SIRIUS
2. Raw Telemetry Packet Process

config.

start by OBSID

1. Data Processing

ODB

Setup

Time
(ground)
6. Time Calibration Data Process

Orbit
(determined)
9. Orbit Data Process

Command (plan)
10. OperationCommand Process

4. Resolve Data Process

3. Spacecraft-bus Data Process
5. Xtend Data Process

Attitude
8. Attitude Data Process

11. Good-Time-Interval Generation &
Slew/Pointiing Division Process

12. Common Header Management

14. Packaging Process

FFF

13. Observation-

Database Interafce

ODB

end
Fig 6 Flowchart of the PPL process.

manually by the SOT or MOT. Therefore, additional OTs for the archive activity are a generation

tool for a) metadata for data search and b) hierarchical progressive survey (HiPS) data for quick

viewing, which are identified as OT08 in Table 6.

6.3 Preparation for User Support Researcher webpages are required for communication with GOs for the user-support activities listed in Table 4, and are planned to be operated in three centers: SOC, SDC, and ESAC. In the first version, the following content is listed on the researcher webpages at SOC.
33

Distributer
(quick)
2. Raw Telemetry Packet Process

config.

start by Operation PASS

1. Data Processing

ODB

Setup

Time
(temporal)
6. Time Calibration Data Process

Orbit
(estimated)
9. Orbit Data Process

Command (plan)
10. OperationCommand Process

4. Resolve Data Process

3. Spacecraft-bus Data Process
5. Xtend Data Process

Attitude
8. Attitude Data Process

11. Good-Time-Interval Generation &
Slew/Pointiing Division Process

12. Common Header Management
14. Packaging Process

QLFF

13. Observation-

Database Interafce

ODB

end
Fig 7 Same as Figure 6, but for QLDP. Gray colors represent the modules omitted in QLDP.

· Top page, News and Announcements

· About XRISM (XRISM documents, workshops, publication list, resources)

· Proposer (GO proposal documents, response files, generic ToO request, approved target list)

· Observers (short-term/long-term operation plan, spacecraft operation log)

· Analysis (manual, link to archive web, link to download page for software/calibration database)

34

Table 7 List of tasks for archiving XRISM data at JAXA and division of tasks between SOT and C-SODA.

Category

Task

Team

Data preparation

Preparation of FITS files

XRISM SOT

Definition of distribution range

XRISM SOT

Definition of proprietary period

XRISM SOT

Preparation of data storage

JAXA C-SODA

Preparation of public webpages

JAXA C-SODA

Project introduction page Preparation of contents

XRISM SOT

Preparation of public webpages

JAXA C-SODA

Public data list

Generation of the list and HTML

XRISM SOT

Preparation of public webpages

JAXA C-SODA

Data search

Preparation of search engine

JAXA C-SODA

Preparation of metadata

XRISM SOT

Installation of XRISM metadata

JAXA C-SODA

Quick viewing

Preparation of quick-viewing system JAXA C-SODA

Preparation of HiPS format of XRISM XRISM SOT

Installation of XRISM HiPS data

JAXA C-SODA

· XRISM Help Desk (FAQ, proposal plan support, analysis questions, XRISM workshops)

· Useful links (link to general public XRISM website, HEASARC website, ESAC website)

The MOPT prepares the web servers and the tools for filling the content of the pages of observation plan and spacecraft operation log semi-automatically. These tools are identified as OT10 in Table 6. The JAXA researcher webpage was opened on 1 November 2020 at https://xrism.isas.jaxa.jp/ and is used for announcements to GOs before launch and is to be activated on the science operations after launch.

6.4 Preparation of PVO Activities In principle, all the PVO activities are performed by all the science members of the XRISM team before launch. The items for the MOPT to prepare for the science operations in orbit are the

35

detailed procedure for opening these efforts to GOs via the XRISM software, calibration database, and the analysis method, which are already covered in Section 5.
In order to perform the four science operations tasks described in Section 5.4 and Table 4, the MOPT prepares the following items.
· Calibration analyses As defined in Table 2, the in-orbit calibration items and procedures are prepared by the instrument teams, and the SOT also analyzes the in-orbit calibration observations with the instrument teams. Therefore, the MOPT prepares the training procedure for understanding the calibration items and procedures with the instrument team before launch.
· Monthly performance check Daily and monthly checks of instrument performance require no special tools other than the standard analysis software. In this sense, the MOPT has no plan to prepare the tools before launch. If the MOPT identifies additional tools during the rehearsal of instrument operation on ground in the PFT Phase (Section 3.3), the MOPT will prepare the tools from this phase.
· Development of analysis threads and tools All of the standard analysis will be performed using the public standard tools (OT08 in Table 6). For the monthly or daily performance checks, the SOT tries to study and identify new proprieties or behaviors of instruments which affect the instrument performance. If the SOT finds a way to enhance the instrument performance using these items, the SOT will implement the procedure as an analysis
36

thread or prepare a new public tool using the newly found algorithm. · Xtend transient search
As described in Section 5.4, the SOT carries out further analyses to search for possible new transient objects within the field of view of the Xtend and posts a quick report to the ATEL, under the permission of the observation PIs. The MOPT prepares the detailed procedure for this operation to obtain a quick response and the automatic search tool of transients.
7 Summary In preparation of science operations of the XRISM mission, we reviewed the lessons learned from past X-ray missions in Section 2 to identify recommendations for the XRISM Science Operations (Section 2.5), which are considered as part of the operations concept (Section 3). Based on the operations concepts, we designed the structure of the SOT, interfaces among subgroups, management structure, and data policy in Section 4 and established a detailed plan of the science operations as described in Section 5. As the final step of preparation of science operations, we identified 10 OTs and developed them as summarized in Section 6 before launch.
Acknowledgments We thank Dr. Masa Sakano (WiseBabel Ltd.) for the detail design and implementation of the toplevel-script of PPL, xappl. This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP18H04571 and JP20K04009 (YT), JP19K14762 (MS), JP17K14289 (MN), JP20K20935 (SK and MT), and NASA Grant Number 80NSSC20K0737.
37

Appendix A: Acronyms and Abbreviations Abbreviations and acronyms used in this paper are shown in Table 8.
References 1 M. Tashiro, H. Maejima, K. Toda, et al., "Concept of the X-ray Astronomy Recovery Mission," in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2018: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, J.-W. A. den Herder, S. Nikzad, and K. Nakazawa, Eds., Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 10699, 1069922 (2018). 2 T. Takahashi, M. Kokubun, K. Mitsuda, et al., "Hitomi (ASTRO-H) X-ray Astronomy Satellite," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 021402 (2018). 3 T. Makoto, M. Hironori, T. Kenichi, et al., "Status of x-ray imaging and spectroscopy mission (XRISM)," in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, J.W. A. den Herder, S. Nikzad, and K. Nakazawa, Eds., 11444, 293 ­ 303, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2020). 4 R. J. Hanisch, A. Farris, E. W. Greisen, et al., "Definition of the Flexible Image Transport System (FITS)," Astronomy and Astrophysics 376, 359­380 (2001). 5 L. Angelini, Y. Terada, M. Dutka, et al., "Astro-H/Hitomi data analysis, processing, and archive," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 011207 (2018). 6 Y. Terada, M. Holland, M. Loewenstein, et al., "Detail plans and preparations for the science operations of the XRISM mission," in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, J.-W. A. den Herder, S. Nikzad, and K. Nakazawa, Eds., 11444, 926 ­ 945, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2020).
38

Abbreviations ATEL C-SODA CALDB DARTS EPO ESA ESAC FFF FITS FOV GO GOF HEASARC IACHEC ISAS IFCP IT JAXA MOPT MOT NASA OC1 ­ OC3 OT PFT PI PL PM PPL PV PVO QLDP RPT SCT SDTP SFF SIB2 SMO SO1 ­ SO5 SOT ToO XRISM

Table 8 Acronyms and Abbreviations.
Acronyms the Astronomers Telegram the Center for Science Satellite Operation and Data Archive the calibration database the Data ARchive and Transmission System Education and Public Outreach the European Space Agency the European Space Astronomy Center the First FITS Files flexible image transport system field of view Guest Observer Guest Observer Facility the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center the International Astrophysical Consortium for High Energy Calibration the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science the In-flight Calibration Planning instrument team the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency the Mission Operations Planning Team the Mission Operations Team National Aeronautics and Space Administration XRISM Operations Concept operations tool Proto-Flight Test pulse-height invariant pipeline the Project Manager the pre-pipeline the performance verification Performance verification and optimization Quick-look Data Process raw packet telemetry Hitomi software and calibration team the Space Data Transfer Protocol the Second FITS Files Spacecraft Information Base version 2 the Science Management Office Science Operations Type the Science Operations Team time of opportunity The X-Ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission

Section section 5.4 section 6.2.3 section 6.2.1 section 5.3 section 5.4 section 1 section 4.2 section 6.2.1 section 1 section 1 section 2.1 section 2.2 section 5.3 section 2.3 section 2.2 section 4 section 2.2 section 1 section 3.3 section 3.2 section 1 section 3.1 section 6.1 section 3.3 section 2.3 section 5.3 section 4.1 section 5.3 section 2.4 section 2.1 section 5.3 section 6.2.1 section 2.4 section 6.2.1 section 6.2.1 section 6.2.1 section 3.2 section 2.1 section 3.2 section 3.2 section 1

39

7 Y. Tanaka, H. Inoue, and S. S. Holt, "The X-Ray Astronomy Satellite ASCA," Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan 46, L37­L41 (1994).
8 K. Mitsuda, M. Bautz, H. Inoue, et al., "The X-Ray Observatory Suzaku," Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan 59, S1­S7 (2007).
9 Y. Terada, S. Watanabe, M. Ohno, et al., "Development of a Monte Carlo Simulator for the Astro-E2 Hard X-Ray Detector (HXD-II)," IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 52, 902­ 909 (2005).
10 Y. Terada, A. Bamba, J. S. Hiraga, et al., "The 7-Steps of the Data Analysis," Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement 169, 312­315 (2007).
11 K. Madsen et al., "IACHEC: The International Astrophysical Consortium of High Energy Calibration," in "SPIE Astronomical Telescopes + Instrumentation (AS20)", Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series 000, 11444­22 (2020).
12 Y. Terada, S. Yamaguchi, S. Sugimoto, et al., "Time assignment system and its performance aboard the Hitomi satellite," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 011206 (2018).
13 M. A. Leutenegger, M. Audard, K. R. Boyce, et al., "In-flight verification of the calibration and performance of the ASTRO-H (Hitomi) Soft X-ray Spectrometer," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 021407 (2018).
14 M. E. Eckart, J. S. Adams, K. R. Boyce, et al., "Ground calibration of the Astro-H (Hitomi) soft x-ray spectrometer," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 021406 (2018).
15 M. Tsujimoto, T. Okajima, M. E. Eckart, et al., "In-flight calibration of Hitomi Soft X-ray
40

Spectrometer. (3) Effective area," Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan 70, 20 (2018). 16 C. A. Kilbourne, M. Sawada, M. Tsujimoto, et al., "In-flight calibration of Hitomi Soft Xray Spectrometer. (1) Background," Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan 70, 18 (2018). 17 M. E. Eckart, K. R. Boyce, G. V. Brown, et al., "Calibration of the microcalorimeter spectrometer on-board the Hitomi (Astro-H) observatory (invited)," Review of Scientific Instruments 87, 11D503 (2016). 18 R. Iizuka, T. Hayashi, Y. Maeda, et al., "Ground-based x-ray calibration of the AstroH/Hitomi soft x-ray telescopes," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 011213 (2018). 19 Y. Maeda, T. Sato, T. Hayashi, et al., "In-flight calibration of the Hitomi Soft X-ray Spectrometer. (2) Point spread function," Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan 70, 19 (2018). 20 H. Mori, T. Miyazawa, H. Awaki, et al., "On-ground calibration of the Hitomi Hard Xray Telescopes," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 011210 (2018). 21 K. Hagino, K. Nakazawa, G. Sato, et al., "In-orbit performance and calibration of the Hard Xray Imager onboard Hitomi (ASTRO-H)," Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 4, 021409 (2018). 22 E. D. Miller, M. Sawada, M. Guainazzi, et al., "Planning in-flight calibration for XRISM," in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, J.-W. A. den Herder,
41

S. Nikzad, and K. Nakazawa, Eds., 11444, 325 ­ 344, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2020). 23 M. Loewenstein, R. S. Hill, M. P. Holland, et al., "The XRISM science data center: optimizing the scientific return from a unique x-ray observatory," in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, J.-W. A. den Herder, S. Nikzad, and K. Nakazawa, Eds., 11444, 910 ­ 925, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE (2020). Yukikatsu Terada is an associated professor at Saitama University, cross-appointed with Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. He received his BS and MS degrees in physics, and a PhD degree in science from the University of Tokyo in 1997, 1999, and 2002, respectively. He is the leader of the Science Operations Team of the X-Ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission (XRISM) project now. Biographies and photographs of the other authors are not available.
42

