Curiosity-based Robot Navigation under Uncertainty in Crowded Environments

Kuanqi Cailj2, Weinan Chen1, Chaoqun Wang3, Shuang Song2, and Max Q.-H. Meng1,2, Fellow, IEEE

-- Abstract Mobile robots have become more and more popu¬
lar in our daily life. In large-scale and crowded enyironments, how to navigate safely with localization precision is a critical problem. To solve this problem, we proposed a curiosity-based framework that can find an effective path with the consideration of human comfort, localization uncertainty, crowds, and the cost-to-go to the target. Three parts are involved in the proposed framework: the distance assessment module, the curiosity gain of the information-rich area, and the curiosity negative gain of crowded areas. The curiosity gain of the information-rich area was proposed to provoke the robot to approach localization referenced landmarks. To guarantee human comfort while co¬ existing with robots, we propose curiosity gain of the spacious area to bypass the crowd and maintain an appropriate distance between robots and humans. The evaluation is conducted in an unstructured environment. The results show that our method can find a feasible path, which can consider the localization uncertainty while simultaneously avoiding the crowded area.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the past few years, with the rapid development of mobile robots, service robot driving in the large-scale and human-robot coexistence environment has attracted growing attention [1]. Therefore, how to generate a feasible trajectory in such environments becomes an essential problem for service robots [2].
In this paper, we focus on three aspects of the problem including collision risk and human comfort, crowds, and localization uncertainty. In terms of completing navigation tasks quickly and safely, it is important to endow service robots with fundamental navigation capabilities that meet both collision-free and safe objectives [3]. In our curiositybased framework, curiosity is defined as the unsupervised act of moving through the areas which contain landmarks or few humans based on the robots'current condition. Different from the curiosity-based path planner proposed by Zhang et.al [4], which guides robot only to learn environmental information of obstacles, our proposed method can seek a feasible path considering both low localization uncertainty and human-comfort behavior. We set different gains to in¬ spire the "curiosity" in terms of the robots current condition and propel the path planning. Considering the condition of human dense, robot navigation should be effective to avoid driving into the crowded area, which may cause the "freezing robot problem" [5], and have an adverse effect on human
1Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Robotics Perception and Intelligence, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
School of Mechanical Engineering and Automation, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China.
3School of control science and engineering, Shandong university, Shan¬ dong, China.

Fig. 1. Illustration of the proposed method. Our method with cunosity gain of information-rich area (zu) and curiosity negative gain of crowded area
(5) is able to generate a human-friendly path (red) that can simultaneously avoid crowds and approach landmarks, which makes humans comfortable and minimize state estimation uncertainty. Besides, the method with the curiosity gain VJ (green) can approach landmarks area while it leads to a high collision risk with humans. The original without these curiosity gains enter both crowded and landmarks deficient areas, resulting in large localization uncertainty and comfort reduction. The smaller the ellipse is, the more accurate the robot localization is. Hi presents humans. Gi presents humans who engage in conversation in a group.
comfort simultaneously. In other words, crowded areas have a curiosity negative gain to prevent robots from navigating in such areas. Besides, the operating scope of serve robots may be relatively large, like airports. In such environments, state estimation may not be accurate because of the lack of landmarks and measurement noise [6]. Therefore, robots need to be curious about the information-rich area and then generate the path across these areas to reduce the localization uncertainty. To solve such problems, we present an inte¬ grated, curiosity-based approach for mobile robot navigation. This approach can both avoid crowds and consider the localization uncertainty in dynamic environments.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The target of driving the robot in a crowded environment is to find a feasible path bypassing the crowd and reducing the localization uncertainty. We use M to represent the map of the environment created by the robot. 0ÿbs(t) represents the un-modeled obstacles, which includes humans and lifeless obstacles Oso(t). These obstacles are newly
introduced which are not in M. Ofree(t) represents the free
space in the map, which excludes the modeled obstacles
and un-modeled obstacles (humans). Omark represents the
landmark space in the map. The non-linear motion model of

Trajectory Generator

Patlil
f-

Patli2 P ?_

Path*S"
-P Yes

Human comfortable

L

Obstacles

Comfort and Collision Risk

t
Individual
& itt -- Humans

Static
-- Dynamic
Probability of collision risk

Human-aware model

Uncertainty Evaluation:

<

No

Textureless area

·C(9j)

Proposed path

*

Landmark Information-rich area

Evaluation module Qopt = min£*(qyÿ)

<a

+ w2

+ w3ÿD(

Curiosity Negative Gain 8

Crowded area

--·" /~

Humans Proposed path

pÿ"*- Spacious

OKI. Distance Assessment Module

Optimal Path

Execution

Fig. 2. System diagram of the curiosity-based path planner. Evaluation Module calculates the cost of the multiple trajectories generated by the Trajectory Generator, and the trajectory with the minimum cost is considered the optimum one.

the robot is depicted as:

x{t + l) = f{x(t),u{t),mt), mt r-sj
x x{t) G is valid robot state at time t. \ 1S the state
space. u(t) G is the control vector in the control space
U. mt is the motion noise with mean 0 and variance Mt.
The measurement of the robot at time t is z(t) E Z. Z
is the observation set that contains the whole observation
information of the robot. The formula of z(t) is as follow

nt AA(0,iVÿ.

(2)

rit is the measurement noise based on Gaussian distribution
with variance Nt. During navigation process, the path plan¬
ning is repeated at each time step At. Qj : represents nontrivial trajectories generated in jth time step.
contains a number of states, control inputs and observations, n is the index of state along the path. The best path from a set of nontrivial trajectories in jth time step can be formulated
by

Qopt = min

S.t.

OG

(3)

q) G

e [t,t At]

where O represents landmarks in the environment. £* is the objective function to find the best path from a set of nontrivial trajectories.
The curiosity-based function £* is expressed as

/ÿ*(qÿÿ) =

%;ÿ) > a
C{qi) + wc;-1(qÿO) i{q]) < a.

i is the evaluation of localization uncertainty and a is the
location threshold. When £(qj) is higher than a given thresh¬
old, the robot is regarded as localization fails. represents the function of curiosity gain w, which is positively correlated with the curiosity in the information-rich area. When the localization uncertainty increases, a higher value of <; is got¬ ten. This means that the robot becomes more curious about the information-rich area. w is the weight of the curiosity gain VD. C is the social-aware cost function. It consists of the distance assessment module, curiosity negative gain 6, human comfort, and collision risk. When the robot works in increasingly crowded environments, the curiosity negative gain of the crowded areas will increase. In such conditions, the curiosity of crowded areas is lower than the spacious area. Therefore, the robot will be attracted by the spacious area to bypass the crowds. The formula of C is:

nwi c

n +uÿ2

+uÿ3

i=l

i=\

i=\
(5)

where T> is the distance assessment module, which is similar

to the tradition method [7]. H is gaussian process-based

model considering human comfort and collision risk, which

is similar to the [8]. C represents curiosity negative gain S.

III. METHODOLOGY
In this study, we combine the curiosity-based function with the systematic sampling-based planner to find the feasible trajectory. The diagram of the system for trajectory genera¬ tion and assessment in the planning step is illustrated in Fig. 2. First, the Trajectory Generator accounts for generating a series of path candidates from the robot's current position to

Algorithm 1: Trajectory Generation

Input: Map M, Goal g

Output: Trajectory candidates Qj

i g = read(), Qj = 0;

2

= lÿad{),M. = loadQ;

3 Tree <r- InitializeTreeÿ\

4 while t < At do

5 Qrand Sampling(M);

6 Qnear ~ CClTCSt(ÿQrari(iÿTvCCjÿ

[Qnew) ~

Qnewÿji

8 TTCC -- ExtCTld(ÿQnear:Qrand)ÿ

9 if ObstacleFree(qnew) then

10 |_ Tree.add(qnear,r);

_ 11

FindNearNeighbor{Tree, qnew);

12 Tree t Rewire[qneighborÿqnewÿTree);

13 Qj FindPathCandidates(Tree);

the next position with the sampling-based planning scheme. Second, we calculate the localization uncertainty of the current robot position. If the localization uncertainty of the robot is higher than the threshold, the curiosity gain in the information-rich area will be introduced in the Evaluation Module and the trajectory pass through this area will be rewarded and vice versa. Third, the Evaluation Module is leveraged for the best path with minimum cost.
The workflow of Trajectory Generator which is similar
to [9] can be seen in Alg. 1. Samplingÿ) is used to generate
the random point qrand in the 0/ree. Nearestÿ) is to
search Tree for finding the nearest point qnear to qrandSteer(-) extends Tree from qnear to qrand with path r con¬ sidering the kinematic constraint of robots. qnew represents the end of the path r. qnear is the neighbor point of the Qnew FindNearNeighbor(') is the function to reselect the neighbor point of the qnew on the Tree. Rewire(-) is the rewiring process of Tree to reduce redundant length. These processes is repeated and the Tree continuous updates dur¬ ing each time step Aÿ. When time runs out, trajectories can¬ didates on Tree for robot navigation are generated through FindPathCandidates{'). FindPathCandidates(') is the function to select the trajectories that are collision free and conform to the robot motion model as candidates.
The procedure of effective path generation based on Eval¬ uation Module is shown in Alg. 2. During the navigation process, the robot updates its observation (see lines from 3 to 5 in Alg. 2). In addition, real-time constraints of Evaluation Module, which contain curiosity gain tu, collision risk, and human comfort, curiosity negative gain 6, and distance assessment module are considered to find the best trajectory from a set of candidates (see lines from 6 to 23 in Alg. 2). Different from the artificial potential field-based methods [10], which may lead to local minima and computationally heavy, the collision risk and curiosity-based components in our method are based on a probability model.

Algorithm 2: Optimal Trajectory Generation

Input: Trajectory candidates Qj, Current state xc
Output: Best path from a set of candidates Qopt

1 Humans O"ÿLandmark Omar/cÿUn-modeled Obs O;

2 while g not reached do

3 Obscrvc(Orna7-/c,

4 DELETE unreachable trajectories(Qj, xc, t)\

5 predict at time t,...,t+N * At;

6 £= UncertyCal(xc);

if £> a then

8 | IntroCuriosityGain

i,Qji mark)

9 else

10

L &=ÿ:

11 for j < Number of candidates do

12

for i < size(Qj) do

13

Collision Human Pmsk -

14

DistanceAssessment PDIS =

9ÿ.,

15

IntroCurNegGain Ps = C(ÿh, q))\

16

Qcost ~ COStC

Pdisÿ Pzu)ÿ

17

Z++ÿ

18

_ i++;

19 Qopt ~ Min(Qcosÿ),

20 if Qÿpt = 0 then 21 | break;

22 else

23

move along Qopt for one step;

A. Curiosity gain of information-rich areas
The curiosity gain w is a probabilistic model which is designed to reduce the localization uncertainty of the robot when driving in dynamic environments. The higher the probability, the more curious the robot is about the area. Curiosity gain vo contains three parts: collision region, curiosity region, and overlap region.
1) Collision Region: Landmark often refers to the known obstacles in the map, which can be used for robot local¬ ization. The collision region is the area where the robot would collide with the landmarks. The collision region of the landmark is the inflation of the landmark. The inflation radius is the robot's inscribed radius. The probability of curiosity gain VJ in this area is zero, which presents this area as not attractive to robots.
2) Curiosity Region: The curiosity region is the expansion of the landmarks, whose inflation radius is according to the laser range. In such an area, the robot has a high probability observe the information of the landmark to locate. The curiosity gain w in this area corresponds to the information content observed by the robot. Hence, it decreases from the inside that is close to the landmark to the outside.
3) Overlap Region: In a crowded area, humans may walk around or stay in the curiosity region. The observation in the human body will introduce localization error, which leads to the failure of the robot localization and even collides with

Cmiosity gain ZJ &ÿ

( Start
C

,
*>2
·/

i

V/Iis
-I

Curiosity gam ox
40

Risk-RRT
--

D=1.5 m

Number of Samples
(b)

30

h\

· h\2 «21

--Human trajectory

hi Human

40

\--hj--hi2 fi24--hÿ

100

200

300

Number of Samples

(d)

--

-T

Goal /i3
2ÿ4

(a)

D=1.5 nr

0

100

200

300

Number of Samples

(c)

L
50 100 150 200 250 300 Number of Samples
(e)

Fig. 3. Experimental results of the simulation environment, (a) Simulation environment and navigation paths.(b)-(d) Distances between humans and robot. (e) Uncertainty of paths.

humans. Therefore, we set the overlap region according to the area occupied by humans. The probability of curiosity gain w in this area will be reduced.
B. Curiosity negative gain of crowded areas
We proposed curiosity negative gain S which is presented by a two-dimensional Gaussian mixture model to describe the crowded area in the dynamic case at a certain moment. The mean of this model is the center of the crowd and its covariances are depend on the humans at the crowd boundary. The value of curiosity negative gain <5 is inversely proportional to the distance between the robot and the center of the crowd. At each time step, curiosity negative gain of crowded areas will be calculated based on the change in the environment to update the trajectory.
IV. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
We conduct the simulation by using the stage simulator in Robot Operation System (ROS). 1 The robot in the simulation environment is mounted with a laser sensor. Besides, we use Adaptive Monte Carlo Localization (AMCL) [11] for localization. The simulation scenario is shown in Fig. 3(a), which is a large-scale and crowded environment with 27 humans. Humans move in different directions and speeds within the environment. The velocity of different humans is set to be a random value in a range of [0, 1] (m/s). The global information of humans moving in the environment is available to the robot during online planning. There are few landmarks in the central area of the upper part of the scenario. Our method and the compared methods are shown in different colors in Fig. 3. The red results (path
Video demonstration is available at https://youtu.be/02JJWS2Vpck

in Fig. 3(a) and curves in Fig. 3(b), (e)) are generated by our method, which considers both the curiosity gain VJ and curiosity negative gain <5. The green results are generated by the method only considering the curiosity gain tu, and the blue results are generated by Risk-RRT [7], which does not consider the curiosity gain. The other two methods drive the robot into a crowded area where it is unable to keep a proper distance from humans.
Intuitively, compared with the other two methods, our proposed method can generate the trajectory closer to the landmark and bypass the crowded area more smoothly. The other two methods without considering the curiosity negative gain S drive the robot into the crowd, which has to make a detour for avoiding humans. Besides, the distances between the nearest humans and the robot in crowded areas are shorter than that in the spacious area. Fig. 3(b)-(d) show the distances between the humans and robot. D=1.5m is the defined threshold [12], below which the human will feel uncomfortable. To display results clearly, we show the three minimum distances (D) or distances (D) less than or equal to the threshold. The distances in our method are always higher than the threshold. However, this indicator cannot be satisfied by other methods. Such results demonstrate that our method enables the robot to maintain an appropriate distance from humans without affecting human comfort. In addition, in Fig. 3(e), both the red curve and green curve, which both consider the uncertainty effect have lower pose estimation uncertainty than others.
The experiment is repeated 10 times. PE, MD, TD, and NT are used for evaluations comprehensively. PE is the pose estimate uncertainty. MD is the minimum distance between humans and the robot while completing the navigation task. TD is the ratio of the duration (when D is smaller than the

TABLE I STATISTICS OF THE THREE METHODS IN SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS.

PE NT TD MD

Curiosity gain VJ Sz 8 0.096 0

0 2.065

Curiosity gain VD 0.119 3.7 0.238 0.509

Risk-RRT

1.315 4.2 0.266 0.385

threshold) to the total time of the robot moving. NT is the average number of times that the robot's minimum distance is lower than the given threshold. As shown in Table I, the proposed method has the minimums value of NT and TD, and it also has a maximum value of MD. This indicates that the proposed method can maintain an appropriate distance from humans. Besides, it can be seen that the proposed method has the minimum PE, which indicates that our method has the lowest localization uncertainty among the other methods. The simulation demonstrates the effectiveness of our curiosity-based method.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The curiosity-based method can plan a collision-free path with the consideration of the robot state estimation and the
distribution of the crowd. Simulations are carried out to
demonstrate the advantage of the proposed method. In the future, we will further study the possibility of applying the proposed method to more complex scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] International Federation of Robotics. Executive summary world robotics 2018 service robots, 2018.
[2] Angeliki Zacharaki, Ioannis Kostavelis, Antonios Gasteratos, and Ioannis Dokas. Safety bounds in human robot interaction: a survey. Safety science, 127:104667, 2020.
[3] Kuanqi Cai, Chaoqun Wang, Jiyu Cheng, Clarence W De Silva, and Max Q-H Meng. Mobile robot path planning in dynamic environments: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14195, 2020.
[4] Jiahui Zhang, Xiaogang Ruan, Jing Huang, Jie Chai, and Yue Wu. A curiosity-based mobile robot path planning method. In 2019 IEEE 4th
Advanced Information Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC), volume 1, pages 476-480. IEEE, 2019.
[5] Tingxiang Fan, Xinjing Cheng, Jia Pan, Pinxin Long, Wenxi Liu, Ruigang Yang, and Dinesh Manocha. Getting robots unfrozen and unlost in dense pedestrian crowds. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(2):1178-1185, 2019.
[6] Adam Bry and Nicholas Roy. Rapidly-exploring random belief trees for motion planning under uncertainty. In 2011 IEEE international
conference on robotics and automation, pages 723--730. IEEE, 2011.
[7] Chiara Fulgenzi, Anne Spalanzani, Christian Laugier, and Christopher Tay. Risk based motion planning and navigation in uncertain dynamic environment. 2010.
[8] Javier V Gomez, Nikolaos Mavridis, and Santiago Garrido. Social path planning: Generic human-robot interaction framework for robotic navigation tasks. In 2nd Inti workshop on cognitive robotics systems: replicating human actions and activities, 2013.
[9] Wenzheng Chi and Max Q-H Meng. Risk-rrt: A robot motion planning algorithm for the human robot coexisting environment. In 2017
18th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR), pages
583-588. IEEE, 2017. [10] Ahmed Hussain Qureshi and Yasar Ayaz. Potential functions based
sampling heuristic for optimal path planning. Autonomous Robots, 40(6):1079-1093, 2016. [11] A Howard and B Gerkey. Adaptive monte-carlo localization (amcl) package, robot operating system (ros), 2002. [12] Gerald L Stone and Cathy J Morden. Effect of distance on verbal
productivity. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 23(5):486, 1976.

